moved weirdly: He saw it out of the corner of his eye;
panic made him turn and horror paralyzed him as he
saw the old body collapsing and the great snake
pouring from the place where her neck had been.
The snake struck as he raised his wand: The force of
the bite to his forearm sent the wand spinning up
toward the ceiling; its light swung dizzyingly around
the room and was extinguished: Then a powerful blow
from the tail to his midriff knocked the breath out of
him: He fell backward onto the dressing table, into
the mound of filthy clothing —
 
He rolled sideways, narrowly avoiding the snake’s tail,
which thrashed down upon the table where he had
been a second earlier: Fragments of the glass surface
rained upon him as he hit the floor. From below he
heard Hermione call, “Harry?”
He could not get enough breath into his lungs to call
back: Then a heavy smooth mass smashed him to the
floor and he felt it slide over him, powerful, muscular
“No!” he gasped, pinned to the floor.
“Yes,” whispered the voice. “Yesss ... hold you ... hold
you ...”
“Accio ... Accio Wand ...”
But nothing happened and he needed his hands to try
to force the snake from him as it coiled itself around
his torso, squeezing the air from him, pressing the
Horcrux hard into his chest, a circle of ice that
throbbed with life, inches from his own frantic heart,
and his brain was flooding with cold, white light, all
thought obliterated, his own breath drowned, distant
footsteps, everything going. ...
A metal heart was banging outside his chest, and now
he was flying, flying with triumph in his heart,
without need of broomstick or thestral. ...
He was abruptly awake in the sour-smelling
darkness; Nagini had released him. He scrambled up
and saw the snake outlined against the landing light:
It struck, and Hermione dived aside with a shriek; her
deflected curse hit the curtained window, which
shattered. Frozen air filled the room as Harry ducked
to avoid another shower of broken glass and his foot
slipped on a pencil-like something — his wand —
 
He bent and snatched it up, but now the room was
full of the snake, its tail thrashing; Hermione was
nowhere to be seen and for a moment Harry thought
the worst, but then there was a loud bang and a flash
of red light, and the snake flew into the air, smacking
Harry hard in the face as it went, coil after heavy coil
rising up to the ceiling. Harry raised his wand, but as
he did so, his scar seared more painfully, more
powerfully than it had done in years.
“He’s coming! Hermione, he’s comingl”
As he yelled the snake fell, hissing wildly. Everything
was chaos: It smashed shelves from the wall, and
splintered china flew everywhere as Harry jumped
over the bed and seized the dark shape he knew to be
Hermione —
She shrieked with pain as he pulled her back across
the bed: The snake reared again, but Harry knew that
worse than the snake was coming, was perhaps
already at the gate, his head was going to split open
with the pain from his scar —
The snake lunged as he took a running leap, dragging
Hermione with him; as it struck, Hermione screamed,
“ ConfringoV’ and her spell flew around the room,
exploding the wardrobe mirror and ricocheting back
at them, bouncing from floor to ceiling; Harry felt the
heat of it sear the back of his hand. Glass cut his
cheek as, pulling Hermione with him, he leapt from
bed to broken dressing table and then straight out of
the smashed window into nothingness, her scream
reverberating through the night as they twisted in
midair. ...
And then his scar burst open and he was Voldemort
and he was running across the fetid bedroom, his
long white hands clutching at the windowsill as he
 
glimpsed the bald man and the little woman twist and
vanish, and he screamed with rage, a scream that
mingled with the girl’s, that echoed across the dark
gardens over the church bells ringing in Christmas
Day. ...
And his scream was Harry’s scream, his pain was
Harry’s pain ... that it could happen here, where it
had happened before ... here, within sight of that
house where he had come so close to knowing what it
was to die ... to die. ... The pain was so terrible ...
ripped from his body. ... But if he had no body, why
did his head hurt so badly; if he was dead, how could
he feel so unbearably, didn’t pain cease with death,
didn’t it go ...
The night wet and windy, two children dressed as
pumpkins waddling across the square, and the shop
windows covered in paper spiders, all the tawdry
Muggle trappings of a world in which they did not
believe. ... And he was gliding along, that sense of
purpose and power and rightness in him that he
always knew on these occasions. . . . Not anger . . . that
was for weaker souls than he ... but triumph, yes. ...
He had waited for this, he had hoped for it. ...
“Nice costume, mister!”
He saw the small boy’s smile falter as he ran near
enough to see beneath the hood of the cloak, saw the
fear cloud his painted face: Then the child turned and
ran away. ... Beneath the robe he fingered the handle
of his wand. ... One simple movement and the child
would never reach his mother . . . but unnecessary,
quite unnecessary. . . .
And along a new and darker street he moved, and
now his destination was in sight at last, the Fidelius
Charm broken, though they did not know it yet. ...
 
And he made less noise than the dead leaves
slithering along the pavement as he drew level with
the dark hedge, and stared over it. ...
They had not drawn the curtains; he saw them quite
clearly in their little sitting room, the tall black-haired
man in his glasses, making puffs of colored smoke
erupt from his wand for the amusement of the small
black-haired boy in his blue pajamas. The child was
laughing and trying to catch the smoke, to grab it in
his small fist. ...
A door opened and the mother entered, saying words
he could not hear, her long dark-red hair falling over
her face. Now the father scooped up the son and
handed him to the mother. He threw his wand down
upon the sofa and stretched, yawning. . . .
The gate creaked a little as he pushed it open, but
James Potter did not hear. His white hand pulled out
the wand beneath his cloak and pointed it at the
door, which burst open.
He was over the threshold as James came sprinting
into the hall. It was easy, too easy, he had not even
picked up his wand. ...
“Lily, take Harry and go! It’s him! Go! Run! Ill hold
him off!”
Hold him off, without a wand in his hand! . . . He
laughed before casting the curse. . . .
“Avada Kedavra!”
The green light filled the cramped hallway, it lit the
pram pushed against the wall, it made the banisters
glare like lightning rods, and James Potter fell like a
marionette whose strings were cut. ...
 
He could hear her screaming from the upper floor,
trapped, but as long as she was sensible, she, at
least, had nothing to fear. ... He climbed the steps,
listening with faint amusement to her attempts to
barricade herself in. ... She had no wand upon her
either. ... How stupid they were, and how trusting,
thinking that their safety lay in friends, that weapons
could be discarded even for moments. ...
He forced the door open, cast aside the chair and
boxes hastily piled against it with one lazy wave of his
wand ... and there she stood, the child in her arms. At
the sight of him, she dropped her son into the crib
behind her and threw her arms wide, as if this would
help, as if in shielding him from sight she hoped to be
chosen instead. . . .
“Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry!”
“Stand aside, you silly girl . . . stand aside, now. ”
“Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead — ”
“This is my last warning — ”
“Not Harry! Please . . . have mercy . . . have mercy. . . .
Not Harry! Not Harry! Please — I’ll do anything — ”
“Stand aside. Stand aside, girl!”
He could have forced her away from the crib, but it
seemed more prudent to finish them all. ...
The green light flashed around the room and she
dropped like her husband. The child had not cried all
this time: He could stand, clutching the bars of his crib,
and he looked up into the intruder’s face with a kind of
bright interest, perhaps thinking that it was his father
 
who hid beneath the cloak, making more pretty lights,
and his mother would pop up any moment, laughing —
He pointed the wand very carefully into the boy’s face:
He wanted to see it happen, the destruction of this one,
inexplicable danger. The child began to cry: It had seen
that he was not James. He did not like it crying, he
had never been able to stomach the small ones
whining in the orphanage —
“Avada Kedavra!”
And then he broke: He was nothing, nothing but pain
and terror, and he must hide himself, not here in the
rubble of the ruined house, where the child was
trapped and screaming, but far away . . . far away. . . .
“No,” he moaned.
The snake rustled on the filthy, cluttered floor, and he
had killed the boy, and yet he was the boy. . . .
“No ...”
And now he stood at the broken window of Bathilda’s
house, immersed in memories of his greatest loss, and
at his feet the great snake slithered over broken china
and glass. ... He looked down and saw something ...
something incredible. . . .
“No ...”
“Harry, it’s all right, you’re all right!”
He stooped down and picked up the smashed
photograph. There he was, the unknown thief, the
thief he was seeking. . . .
“No ... I dropped it. ... I dropped it. ...”
 
“Harry, it’s okay, wake up, wake up!”
He was Harry. ... Harry, not Voldemort ... and the
thing that was rustling was not a snake. ... He opened
his eyes.
“Harry,” Hermione whispered. “Do you feel all — all
right?”
“Yes,” he lied.
He was in the tent, lying on one of the lower bunks
beneath a heap of blankets. He could tell that it was
almost dawn by the stillness and the quality of the
cold, flat light beyond the canvas ceiling. He was
drenched in sweat; he could feel it on the sheets and
blankets.
“We got away.”
“Yes,” said Hermione. “I had to use a Hover Charm to
get you into your bunk, I couldn’t lift you. You’ve
been ... Well, you haven’t been quite ...”
There were purple shadows under her brown eyes and
he noticed a small sponge in her hand: She had been
wiping his face.
“You’ve been ill,” she finished. “Quite ill.”
“How long ago did we leave?”
“Hours ago. It’s nearly morning.”
“And I’ve been ... what, unconscious?”
“Not exactly,” said Hermione uncomfortably. “You’ve
been shouting and moaning and ... things,” she
added in a tone that made Harry feel uneasy. What
 
had he done? Screamed curses like Voldemort, cried
like the baby in the crib?
“I couldn’t get the Horcrux off you,” Hermione said,
and he knew she wanted to change the subject. “It
was stuck, stuck to your chest. You’ve got a mark; I’m
sorry, I had to use a Severing Charm to get it away.
The snake bit you too, but I’ve cleaned the wound and
put some dittany on it. ...”
He pulled the sweaty T-shirt he was wearing away
from himself and looked down. There was a scarlet
oval over his heart where the locket had burned him.
He could also see the half-healed puncture marks to
his forearm.
“Where Ve you put the Horcrux?”
“In my bag. I think we should keep it off for a while.”
He lay back on his pillows and looked into her
pinched gray face.
“We shouldn’t have gone to Godric’s Hollow. It’s my
fault, it’s all my fault, Hermione, I’m sorry.”
“It’s not your fault. I wanted to go too; I really thought
Dumbledore might have left the sword there for you.”
“Yeah, well ... we got that wrong, didn’t we?”
“What happened, Harry? What happened when she
took you upstairs? Was the snake hiding somewhere?
Did it just come out and kill her and attack you?”
“No,” he said. “She was the snake ... or the snake was
her ... all along.”
“W-what?”
 
He closed his eyes. He could still smell Bathilda’s
house on him: It made the whole thing horribly vivid.
“Bathilda must’ve been dead a while. The snake was
... was inside her. You-Know-Who put it there in
Godric’s Hollow, to wait. You were right. He knew I’d
go back.”
“The snake was inside her?”
He opened his eyes again: Hermione looked revolted,
nauseated.
“Lupin said there would be magic we’d never
imagined,” Harry said. “She didn’t want to talk in
front of you, because it was Parseltongue, all
Parseltongue, and I didn’t realize, but of course I
could understand her. Once we were up in the room,
the snake sent a message to You-Know-Who, I heard
it happen inside my head, I felt him get excited, he
said to keep me there ... and then ...”
He remembered the snake coming our of Bathilda’s
neck: Hermione did not need to know the details.
"... she changed, changed into the snake, and
attacked.”
He looked down at the puncture marks.
“It wasn’t supposed to kill me, just keep me there till
You-Know-Who came.”
If he had only managed to kill the snake, it would
have been worth it, all of it. ... Sick at heart, he sat up
and threw back the covers.
“Harry, no, I’m sure you ought to rest!”
 
“You’re the one who needs sleep. No offense, but you
look terrible. I’m fine. I’ll keep watch for a while.
Where’s my wand?”
She did not answer, she merely looked at him.
“Where’s my wand, Hermione?”
She was biting her lip, and tears swam in her eyes.
“Harry ...”
“ Where’s my wand?”
She reached down beside the bed and held it out to
him.
The holly and phoenix wand was nearly severed in
two. One fragile strand of phoenix feather kept both
pieces hanging together. The wood had splintered
apart completely. Harry took it into his hands as
though it was a living thing that had suffered a
terrible injury. He could not think properly:
Everything was a blur of panic and fear. Then he held
out the wand to Hermione.
“Mend it. Please.”
“Harry, I don’t think, when it’s broken like this — ”
“Please, Hermione, try!”
“R-Reparo.”
The dangling half of the wand resealed itself. Harry
held it up.
“Lumosl”
 
The wand sparked feebly, then went out. Harry
pointed it at Hermione.
“ Expelliarmusl”
Hermione ’s wand gave a little jerk, but did not leave
her hand. The feeble attempt at magic was too much
for Harry’s wand, which split into two again. He
stared at it, aghast, unable to take in what he was
seeing . . . the wand that had survived so much . . .
“Harry,” Hermione whispered so quietly he could
hardly hear her. “I’m so, so sorry. I think it was me.
As we were leaving, you know, the snake was coming
for us, and so I cast a Blasting Curse, and it
rebounded everywhere, and it must have — must
have hit — ”
“It was an accident,” said Harry mechanically. He felt
empty, stunned. “We’ll — we’ll find a way to repair it.”
“Harry, I don’t think we’re going to be able to,” said
Hermione, the tears trickling down her face.
“Remember . . . remember Ron? When he broke his
wand, crashing the car? It was never the same again,
he had to get a new one.”
Harry thought of Ollivander, kidnapped and held
hostage by Voldemort; of Gregorovitch, who was dead.
How was he supposed to find himself a new wand?
“Well,” he said, in a falsely matter-of-fact voice, “well,
I’ll just borrow yours for now, then. While I keep
watch.”
Her face glazed with tears, Hermione handed over her
wand, and he left her sitting beside his bed, desiring
nothing more than to get away from her.
 
THE LIFE AND LIES OF ALBUS
DUMBLEDORE
The sun was coming up: The pure, colorless vastness
of the sky stretched over him, indifferent to him and
his suffering. Harry sat down in the tent entrance and
took a deep breath of clean air. Simply to be alive to
watch the sun rise over the sparkling snowy hillside
ought to have been the greatest treasure on earth, yet
he could not appreciate it: His senses had been
spiked by the calamity of losing his wand. He looked
out over a valley blanketed in snow, distant church
bells chiming through the glittering silence.
Without realizing it, he was digging his fingers into
his arms as if he were trying to resist physical pain.
He had spilled his own blood more times than he
could count; he had lost all the bones in his right arm
once; this journey had already given him scars to his
chest and forearm to join those on his hand and
forehead, but never, until this moment, had he felt
himself to be fatally weakened, vulnerable, and
naked, as though the best part of his magical power
had been torn from him. He knew exactly what
 
Hermione would say if he expressed any of this: The
wand is only as good as the wizard. But she was
wrong, his case was different. She had not felt the
wand spin like the needle of a compass and shoot
golden flames at his enemy. He had lost the
protection of the twin cores, and only now that it was
gone did he realize how much he had been counting
upon it.
He pulled the pieces of the broken wand out of his
pocket and, without looking at them, tucked them
away in Hagrid’s pouch around his neck. The pouch
was now too full of broken and useless objects to take
any more. Harry’s hand brushed the old Snitch
through the mokeskin and for a moment he had to
fight the temptation to pull it out and throw it away.
Impenetrable, unhelpful, useless, like everything else
Dumbledore had left behind —
And his fury at Dumbledore broke over him now like
lava, scorching him inside, wiping out every other
feeling. Out of sheer desperation they had talked
themselves into believing that Godric’s Hollow held
answers, convinced themselves that they were
supposed to go back, that it was all part of some
secret path laid out for them by Dumbledore; but
there was no map, no plan. Dumbledore had left them
to grope in the darkness, to wrestle with unknown
and undreamed-of terrors, alone and unaided:
Nothing was explained, nothing was given freely, they
had no sword, and now, Harry had no wand. And he
had dropped the photograph of the thief, and it would
surely be easy now for Voldemort to find out who he
was. ... Voldemort had all the information now. ...
“Harry?”
Hermione looked frightened that he might curse her
with her own wand. Her face streaked with tears, she
 
crouched down beside him, two cups of tea trembling
in her hands and something bulky under her arm.
“Thanks,” he said, taking one of the cups.
“Do you mind if I talk to you?”
“No,” he said because he did not want to hurt her
feelings.
“Harry, you wanted to know who that man in the
picture was. Well ... I’ve got the book.”
Timidly she pushed it onto his lap, a pristine copy of
The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore.
“Where — how — ?”
“It was in Bathilda’s sitting room, just lying there. ...
This note was sticking out of the top of it.”
Hermione read the few lines of spiky, acid-green
writing aloud.
“ ‘Dear Batty, Thanks for your help. Here’s a copy of
the book, hope you like it. You said everything, even if
you don’t remember it. Rita.’ I think it must have
arrived while the real Bathilda was alive, but perhaps
she wasn’t in any fit state to read it?”
“No, she probably wasn’t.”
Harry looked down upon Dumbledore ’s face and
experienced a surge of savage pleasure: Now he would
know all the things that Dumbledore had never
thought it worth telling him, whether Dumbledore
wanted him to or not.
 
“You’re still really angry at me, aren’t you?” said
Hermione; he looked up to see fresh tears leaking out
of her eyes, and knew that his anger must have
shown in his face.
“No,” he said quietly. “No, Hermione, I know it was an
accident. You were trying to get us out of there alive,
and you were incredible. I’d be dead if you hadn’t
been there to help me.”
He tried to return her watery smile, then turned his
attention to the book. Its spine was stiff; it had clearly
never been opened before. He riffled through the
pages, looking for photographs. He came across the
one he sought almost at once, the young Dumbledore
and his handsome companion, roaring with laughter
at some long-forgotten joke. Harry dropped his eyes to
the caption.
Albus Dumbledore, shortly after his mother’s death,
with his friend Gellert Grindelwald.
Harry gaped at the last word for several long
moments. Grindelwald. His friend Grindelwald. He
looked sideways at Hermione, who was still
contemplating the name as though she could not
believe her eyes. Slowly she looked up at Harry.
“ Grindelwald?”
Ignoring the remainder of the photographs, Harry
searched the pages around them for a recurrence of
that fatal name. He soon discovered it and read
greedily, but became lost: It was necessary to go
further back to make sense of it all, and eventually he
found himself at the start of a chapter entitled “The
Greater Good.” Together, he and Hermione started to
read:
 
Now approaching his eighteenth birthday,
Dumbledore left Hogwarts in a blaze of glory — Head
Boy, Prefect, Winner of the Barnabus Finkley Prize for
Exceptional Spell-Casting, British Youth
Representative to the Wizengamot, Gold Medal-
Winner for Ground-Breaking Contribution to the
International Alchemical Conference in Cairo.
Dumbledore intended, next, to take a Grand Tour
with Elphias “Dogbreath” Doge, the dim-witted but
devoted sidekick he had picked up at school.
The two young men were staying at the Leaky
Cauldron in London, preparing to depart for Greece the
following morning, when an owl arrived bearing news
of Dumbledore’ s mother’s death. “Dogbreath” Doge,
who refused to be interviewed for this book, has given
the public his own sentimental version of what
happened next. He represents Kendra’s death as a
tragic blow, and Dumbledore’s decision to give up his
expedition as an act of noble self-sacrifice.
Certainly Dumbledore returned to Godric’s Hollow at
once, supposedly to “care” for his younger brother
and sister. But how much care did he actually give
them?
“He were a head case, that Aberforth,” says Enid
Smeek, whose family lived on the outskirts of Godric’s
Hollow at that time. “Ran wild. ’Course, with his mum
and dad gone you’d have felt sorry for him, only he
kept chucking goat dung at my head. I don’t think
Albus was fussed about him, I never saw them
together, anyway.”
So what was Albus doing, if not comforting his wild
young brother? The answer, it seems, is ensuring the
continued imprisonment of his sister. For, though her
first jailer had died, there was no change in the pitiful
condition of Ariana Dumbledore. Her very existence
 
continued to be known only to those few outsiders
who, like “Dogbreath” Doge, could be counted upon to
believe in the story of her “ill health.”
Another such easily satisfied friend of the family was
Bathilda Bagshot, the celebrated magical historian
who has lived in Godric’s Hollow for many years.
Kendra, of course, had rebuffed Bathilda when she
first attempted to welcome the family to the village.
Several years later, however, the author sent an owl to
Albus at Hog warts, having been favorably impressed
by his paper on trans-species transformation in
Transfiguration Today. This initial contact led to
acquaintance with the entire Dumbledore family . At
the time of Kendra’s death, Bathilda was the only
person in Godric’s Hollow who was on speaking terms
with Dumbledore’s mother.
Unfortunately, the brilliance that Bathilda exhibited
earlier in her life has now dimmed. “The fire’s lit, but
the cauldron’s empty,” as Ivor Dillonsby put it to me,
or, in Enid Smeek’s slightly earthier phrase, “She’s
nutty as squirrel poo.” Nevertheless, a combination of
tried-and-tested reporting techniques enabled me to
extract enough nuggets of hard fact to string together
the whole scandalous story.
Like the rest of the Wizarding world, Bathilda puts
Kendra’s premature death down to a backfiring
charm, a story repeated by Albus and Aberforth in
later years. Bathilda also parrots the family line on
Ariana, calling her “frail” and “delicate.” On one
subject, however, Bathilda is well worth the effort I
put into procuring Veritaserum, for she, and she
alone, knows the full story of the best-kept secret of
Albus Dumbledore’s life. Now revealed for the first
time, it calls into question everything that his
admirers believed of Dumbledore: his supposed
hatred of the Dark Arts, his opposition to the
 
oppression of Muggles, even his devotion to his own
family.
The very same summer that Dumbledore went home
to Godric’s Hollow, now an orphan and head of the
family, Bathilda Bagshot agreed to accept into her
home her great-nephew, Gellert Grindelwald.
The name of Grindelwald is justly famous: In a list of
Most Dangerous Dark Wizards of All Time, he would
miss out on the top spot only because You-Know-Who
arrived, a generation later, to steal his crown. As
Grindelwald never extended his campaign of terror to
Britain, however, the details of his rise to power are
not widely known here.
Educated at Durmstrang, a school famous even then
for its unfortunate tolerance of the Dark Arts,
Grindelwald showed himself quite as precociously
brilliant as Dumbledore. Rather than channel his
abilities into the attainment of awards and prizes,
however, Gellert Grindelwald devoted himself to other
pursuits. At sixteen years old, even Durmstrang felt it
could no longer turn a blind eye to the twisted
experiments of Gellert Grindelwald, and he was
expelled.
Hitherto, all that has been known of Grindelwald ’s
next movements is that he “traveled abroad for some
months.” It can now be revealed that Grindelwald
chose to visit his great-aunt in Godric’s Hollow, and
that there, intensely shocking though it will be for
many to hear it, he struck up a close friendship with
none other than Albus Dumbledore.
“He seemed a charming boy to me,” babbles Bathilda,
“whatever he became later. Naturally I introduced him
to poor Albus, who was missing the company of lads
his own age. The boys took to each other at once.”
 
They certainly did. Bathilda shows me a letter, kept
by her, that Albus Dumbledore sent Gellert
Grindelwald in the dead of night.
“Yes, even after they’d spent all day in discussion —
both such brilliant young boys, they got on like a
cauldron on fire — I’d sometimes hear an owl tapping
at Gellert’s bedroom window, delivering a letter from
Albus! An idea would have struck him, and he had to
let Gellert know immediately!”
And what ideas they were. Profoundly shocking
though Albus Dumbledore’ s fans will find it, here are
the thoughts of their seventeen-year-old hero, as
relayed to his new best friend. (A copy of the original
letter may be seen on page 463.)
Gellert —
Your point about Wizard dominance being FOR THE
MUGGLES’ OWN GOOD — this, I think , is the crucial
point. Yes, we have been given power and yes, that
power gives us the right to rule, but it also gives us
responsibilities over the ruled. We must stress this
point, it will be the foundation stone upon which we
build. Where we are opposed, as we surely will be, this
must be the basis of all our counterarguments. We
seize control FOR THE GREATER GOOD. And from this
it follows that where we meet resistance, we must use
only the force that is necessary and no more. (This was
your mistake at Durmstrang! But I do not complain,
because if you had not been expelled, we would never
have met.)
Albus
Astonished and appalled though his many admirers
will be, this letter constitutes proof that Albus
Dumbledore once dreamed of overthrowing the Statute
 
of Secrecy and establishing Wizard rule over Muggles.
What a blow for those who have always portrayed
Dumbledore as the Muggle-boms’ greatest champion!
How hollow those speeches promoting Muggle rights
seem in the light of this damning new evidence! How
despicable does Albus Dumbledore appear, busy
plotting his rise to power when he should have been
mourning his mother and caring for his sister!
No doubt those determined to keep Dumbledore on
his crumbling pedestal will bleat that he did not, after
all, put his plans into action, that he must have
suffered a change of heart, that he came to his
senses. However, the truth seems altogether more
shocking.
Barely two months into their great new friendship,
Dumbledore and Grindelwald parted, never to see each
other again until they met for their legendary duel (for
more, see chapter 22). What caused this abrupt
rupture? Had Dumbledore come to his senses? Had he
told Grindelwald he wanted no more part in his plans?
Alas, no.
“It was poor little Ariana dying, I think, that did it,”
says Bathilda. “It came as an awful shock. Gellert was
there in the house when it happened, and he came
back to my house all of a dither, told me he wanted to
go home the next day. Terribly distressed, you know.
So I arranged a Portkey and that was the last I saw of
him.
“Albus was beside himself at Ariana’s death. It was so
dreadful for those two brothers. They had lost
everybody except each other. No wonder tempers ran
a little high. Aberforth blamed Albus, you know, as
people will under these dreadful circumstances. But
Aberforth always talked a little madly, poor boy. All
the same, breaking Albus’s nose at the funeral was
 
not decent. It would have destroyed Kendra to see her
sons fighting like that, across her daughter’s body. A
shame Gellert could not have stayed for the funeral.
... He would have been a comfort to Albus, at least.
This dreadful coffin- side brawl, known only to those
few who attended Ariana Dumbledore’s funeral, raises
several questions. Why exactly did Aberforth
Dumbledore blame Albus for his sister’s death? Was
it, as “Batty” pretends, a mere effusion of grief? Or
could there have been some more concrete reason for
his fury? Grindelwald, expelled from Durmstrang for
near-fatal attacks upon fellow students, fled the
country hours after the girl’s death, and Albus (out of
shame or fear?) never saw him again, not until forced
to do so by the pleas of the Wizarding world.
Neither Dumbledore nor Grindelwald ever seems to
have referred to this brief boyhood friendship in later
life. However, there can be no doubt that Dumbledore
delayed, for some five years of turmoil, fatalities, and
disappearances, his attack upon Gellert Grindelwald.
Was it lingering affection for the man or fear of
exposure as his once best friend that caused
Dumbledore to hesitate? Was it only reluctantly that
Dumbledore set out to capture the man he was once
so delighted he had met?
And how did the mysterious Ariana die? Was she the
inadvertent victim of some Dark rite? Did she stumble
across something she ought not to have done, as the
two young men sat practicing for their attempt at
glory and domination? Is it possible that Ariana
Dumbledore was the first person to die “for the
greater good”?
 
The chapter ended here and Harry looked up.
Hermione had reached the bottom of the page before
him. She tugged the book out of Harry’s hands,
looking a little alarmed by his expression, and closed
it without looking at it, as though hiding something
indecent.
“Harry — ”
But he shook his head. Some inner certainty had
crashed down inside him; it was exactly as he had felt
after Ron left. He had trusted Dumbledore, believed
him the embodiment of goodness and wisdom. All was
ashes: How much more could he lose? Ron,
Dumbledore, the phoenix wand ...
“Harry.” She seemed to have heard his thoughts.
“Listen to me. It — it doesn’t make very nice reading
“Yeah, you could say that — ”
“ — but don’t forget, Harry, this is Rita Skeeter
writing.”
“You did read that letter to Grindelwald, didn’t you?”
“Yes, I — I did.” She hesitated, looking upset, cradling
her tea in her cold hands. “I think that’s the worst bit.
I know Bathilda thought it was all just talk, but ‘For
the Greater Good’ became Grindelwald ’s slogan, his
justification for all the atrocities he committed later.
And . . . from that ... it looks like Dumbledore gave him
the idea. They say ‘For the Greater Good’ was even
carved over the entrance to Nurmengard.”
“What’s Nurmengard?”
 
“The prison Grindelwald had built to hold his
opponents. He ended up in there himself, once
Dumbledore had caught him. Anyway, it’s — it’s an
awful thought that Dumbledore ’s ideas helped
Grindelwald rise to power. But on the other hand,
even Rita can’t pretend that they knew each other for
more than a few months one summer when they were
both really young, and — ”
“I thought you’d say that,” said Harry. He did not
want to let his anger spill out at her, but it was hard
to keep his voice steady. “I thought you’d say They
were young. ’ They were the same age as we are now.
And here we are, risking our lives to fight the Dark
Arts, and there he was, in a huddle with his new best
friend, plotting their rise to power over the Muggles.”
His temper would not remain in check much longer:
He stood up and walked around, trying to work some
of it off.
“I’m not trying to defend what Dumbledore wrote,”
said Hermione. “All that ‘right to rule’ rubbish, it’s
‘Magic Is Might’ all over again. But Harry, his mother
had just died, he was stuck alone in the house — ”
“Alone? He wasn’t alone! He had his brother and
sister for company, his Squib sister he was keeping
locked up — ”
“I don’t believe it,” said Hermione. She stood up too.
“Whatever was wrong with that girl, I don’t think she
was a Squib. The Dumbledore we knew would never,
ever have allowed — ”
“The Dumbledore we thought we knew didn’t want to
conquer Muggles by force!” Harry shouted, his voice
echoing across the empty hilltop, and several
 
blackbirds rose into the air, squawking and spiraling
against the pearly sky.
“He changed, Harry, he changed! It’s as simple as
that! Maybe he did believe these things when he was
seventeen, but the whole of the rest of his life was
devoted to fighting the Dark Arts! Dumbledore was
the one who stopped Grindelwald, the one who always
voted for Muggle protection and Muggle-born rights,
who fought You-Know-Who from the start, and who
died trying to bring him down!”
Rita’s book lay on the ground between them, so that
the face of Albus Dumbledore smiled dolefully at
both.
“Harry, I’m sorry, but I think the real reason you’re so
angry is that Dumbledore never told you any of this
himself.”
“Maybe I am!” Harry bellowed, and he flung his arms
over his head, hardly knowing whether he was trying
to hold in his anger or protect himself from the weight
of his own disillusionment. “Look what he asked from
me, Hermione! Risk your life, Harry! And again! And
again! And don’t expect me to explain everything, just
trust me blindly, trust that I know what I’m doing,
trust me even though I don’t trust you! Never the
whole truth! Never!”
His voice cracked with the strain, and they stood
looking at each other in the whiteness and the
emptiness, and Harry felt they were as insignificant
as insects beneath that wide sky.
“He loved you,” Hermione whispered. “I know he loved
you.”
Harry dropped his arms.
 
“I don’t know who he loved, Hermione, but it was
never me. This isn’t love, the mess he’s left me in. He
shared a damn sight more of what he was really
thinking with Gellert Grindelwald than he ever shared
with me.”
Harry picked up Hermione ’s wand, which he had
dropped in the snow, and sat back down in the
entrance of the tent.
“Thanks for the tea. I’ll finish the watch. You get back
in the warm.”
She hesitated, but recognized the dismissal. She
picked up the book and then walked back past him
into the tent, but as she did so, she brushed the top
of his head lightly with her hand. He closed his eyes
at her touch, and hated himself for wishing that what
she said was true: that Dumbledore had really cared.
 
THE SILVER DOE
It was snowing by the time Hermione took over the
watch at midnight. Harry’s dreams were confused and
disturbing: Nagini wove in and out of them, first
through a gigantic, cracked ring, then through a
wreath of Christmas roses. He woke repeatedly,
panicky, convinced that somebody had called out to
him in the distance, imagining that the wind
whipping around the tent was footsteps or voices.
Finally he got up in the darkness and joined
Hermione, who was huddled in the entrance to the
tent reading A History of Magic by the light of her
wand. The snow was still falling thickly, and she
greeted with relief his suggestion of packing up early
and moving on.
“Well go somewhere more sheltered,” she agreed,
shivering as she pulled on a sweatshirt over her
pajamas. “I kept thinking I could hear people moving
outside. I even thought I saw somebody once or
twice.”
 
Harry paused in the act of pulling on a jumper and
glanced at the silent, motionless Sneakoscope on the
table.
“I’m sure I imagined it,” said Hermione, looking
nervous. “The snow in the dark, it plays tricks on
your eyes. ... But perhaps we ought to Disapparate
under the Invisibility Cloak, just in case?”
Half an hour later, with the tent packed, Harry
wearing the Horcrux, and Hermione clutching the
beaded bag, they Disapparated. The usual tightness
engulfed them; Harry’s feet parted company with the
snowy ground, then slammed hard onto what felt like
frozen earth covered with leaves.
“Where are we?” he asked, peering around at a fresh
mass of trees as Hermione opened the beaded bag
and began tugging out tent poles.
“The Forest of Dean,” she said. “I came camping here
once with my mum and dad.”
Here too snow lay on the trees all around and it was
bitterly cold, but they were at least protected from the
wind. They spent most of the day inside the tent,
huddled for warmth around the useful bright blue
flames that Hermione was so adept at producing, and
which could be scooped up and carried around in a
jar. Harry felt as though he was recuperating from
some brief but severe illness, an impression
reinforced by Hermione ’s solicitousness. That
afternoon fresh flakes drifted down upon them, so
that even their sheltered clearing had a fresh dusting
of powdery snow.
After two nights of little sleep, Harry’s senses seemed
more alert than usual. Their escape from Godric’s
Hollow had been so narrow that Voldemort seemed
 
somehow closer than before, more threatening. As
darkness drew in again Harry refused Hermione’s
offer to keep watch and told her to go to bed.
Harry moved an old cushion into the tent mouth and
sat down, wearing all the sweaters he owned but even
so, still shivery. The darkness deepened with the
passing hours until it was virtually impenetrable. He
was on the point of taking out the Marauder’s Map, so
as to watch Ginny’s dot for a while, before he
remembered that it was the Christmas holidays and
that she would be back at the Burrow.
Every tiny movement seemed magnified in the
vastness of the forest. Harry knew that it must be full
of living creatures, but he wished they would all
remain still and silent so that he could separate their
innocent scurryings and prowlings from noises that
might proclaim other, sinister movements. He
remembered the sound of a cloak slithering over dead
leaves many years ago, and at once thought he heard
it again before mentally shaking himself. Their
protective enchantments had worked for weeks; why
should they break now? And yet he could not throw
off the feeling that something was different tonight.
Several times he jerked upright, his neck aching
because he had fallen asleep, slumped at an awkward
angle against the side of the tent. The night reached
such a depth of velvety blackness that he might have
been suspended in limbo between Disapparition and
Apparition. He had just held up a hand in front of his
face to see whether he could make out his fingers
when it happened.
A bright silver light appeared right ahead of him,
moving through the trees. Whatever the source, it was
moving soundlessly. The light seemed simply to drift
toward him.
 
He jumped to his feet, his voice frozen in his throat,
and raised Hermione’s wand. He screwed up his eyes
as the light became blinding, the trees in front of it
pitch-black in silhouette, and still the thing came
closer. ...
And then the source of the light stepped out from
behind an oak. It was a silver- white doe, moon-bright
and dazzling, picking her way over the ground, still
silent, and leaving no hoofprints in the fine powdering
of snow. She stepped toward him, her beautiful head
with its wide, long-lashed eyes held high.
Harry stared at the creature, filled with wonder, not
at her strangeness, but at her inexplicable familiarity.
He felt that he had been waiting for her to come, but
that he had forgotten, until this moment, that they
had arranged to meet. His impulse to shout for
Hermione, which had been so strong a moment ago,
had gone. He knew, he would have staked his life on
it, that she had come for him, and him alone.
They gazed at each other for several long moments
and then she turned and walked away.
“No,” he said, and his voice was cracked with lack of
use. “Come back!”
She continued to step deliberately through the trees,
and soon her brightness was striped by their thick
black trunks. For one trembling second he hesitated.
Caution murmured it could be a trick, a lure, a trap.
But instinct, overwhelming instinct, told him that this
was not Dark Magic. He set off in pursuit.
Snow crunched beneath his feet, but the doe made no
noise as she passed through the trees, for she was
nothing but light. Deeper and deeper into the forest
she led him, and Harry walked quickly, sure that
 
when she stopped, she would allow him to approach
her properly. And then she would speak and the voice
would tell him what he needed to know.
At last, she came to a halt. She turned her beautiful
head toward him once more, and he broke into a run,
a question burning in him, but as he opened his lips
to ask it, she vanished.
Though the darkness had swallowed her whole, her
burnished image was still imprinted on his retinas; it
obscured his vision, brightening when he lowered his
eyelids, disorienting him. Now fear came: Her
presence had meant safety.
“Lumos\” he whispered, and the wand-tip ignited.
The imprint of the doe faded away with every blink of
his eyes as he stood there, listening to the sounds of
the forest, to distant crackles of twigs, soft swishes of
snow. Was he about to be attacked? Had she enticed
him into an ambush? Was he imagining that
somebody stood beyond the reach of the wandlight,
watching him?
He held the wand higher. Nobody ran out at him, no
flash of green light burst from behind a tree. Why,
then, had she led him to this spot?
Something gleamed in the light of the wand, and
Harry spun about, but all that was there was a small,
frozen pool, its cracked black surface glittering as he
raised the wand higher to examine it.
He moved forward rather cautiously and looked down.
The ice reflected his distorted shadow and the beam
of wandlight, but deep below the thick, misty gray
carapace, something else glinted. A great silver cross
 
His heart skipped into his mouth: He dropped to his
knees at the pool’s edge and angled the wand so as to
flood the bottom of the pool with as much light as
possible. A glint of deep red ... It was a sword with
glittering rubies in its hilt. ... The sword of Gryffindor
was lying at the bottom of the forest pool.
Barely breathing, he stared down at it. How was this
possible? How could it have come to be lying in a
forest pool, this close to the place where they were
camping? Had some unknown magic drawn Hermione
to this spot, or was the doe, which he had taken to be
a Patronus, some kind of guardian of the pool? Or
had the sword been put into the pool after they had
arrived, precisely because they were here? In which
case, where was the person who had wanted to pass
it to Harry? Again he directed the wand at the
surrounding trees and bushes, searching for a
human outline, for the glint of an eye, but he could
not see anyone there. All the same, a little more fear
leavened his exhilaration as he returned his attention
to the sword reposing upon the bottom of the frozen
pool.
He pointed the wand at the silvery shape and
murmured, “Accio Sword.”
It did not stir. He had not expected it to. If it had been
that easy, the sword would have lain on the ground
for him to pick up, not in the depths of a frozen pool.
He set off around the circle of ice, thinking hard
about the last time the sword had delivered itself to
him. He had been in terrible danger then, and had
asked for help.
“Help,” he murmured, but the sword remained upon
the pool bottom, indifferent, motionless.
 
What was it, Harry asked himself (walking again),
that Dumbledore had told him the last time he had
retrieved the sword? Only a true Gryffindor could have
pulled that out of the hat. And what were the qualities
that defined a Gryffindor? A small voice inside Harry’s
head answered him: Their daring, nerve, and chivalry
set Gryffindors apart.
Harry stopped walking and let out a long sigh, his
smoky breath dispersing rapidly upon the frozen air.
He knew what he had to do. If he was honest with
himself, he had thought it might come to this from
the moment he had spotted the sword through the
ice.
He glanced around at the surrounding trees again,
but was convinced now that nobody was going to
attack him. They had had their chance as he walked
alone through the forest, had had plenty of
opportunity as he examined the pool. The only reason
to delay at this point was because the immediate
prospect was so deeply uninviting.
With fumbling fingers Harry started to remove his
many layers of clothing. Where “chivalry” entered into
this, he thought ruefully, he was not entirely sure,
unless it counted as chivalrous that he was not
calling for Hermione to do it in his stead.
An owl hooted somewhere as he stripped off, and he
thought with a pang of Hedwig. He was shivering
now, his teeth chattering horribly, and yet he
continued to strip off until at last he stood there in
his underwear, barefooted in the snow. He placed the
pouch containing his wand, his mother’s letter, the
shard of Sirius’s mirror, and the old Snitch on top of
his clothes, then he pointed Hermione’s wand at the
ice.
 
“Diffindo.”
It cracked with a sound like a bullet in the silence:
The surface of the pool broke and chunks of dark ice
rocked on the ruffled water. As far as Harry could
judge, it was not deep, but to retrieve the sword he
would have to submerge himself completely.
Contemplating the task ahead would not make it
easier or the water warmer. He stepped to the pool’s
edge and placed Hermione’s wand on the ground, still
lit. Then, trying not to imagine how much colder he
was about to become or how violently he would soon
be shivering, he jumped.
Every pore of his body screamed in protest: The very
air in his lungs seemed to freeze solid as he was
submerged to his shoulders in the frozen water. He
could hardly breathe; trembling so violently the water
lapped over the edges of the pool, he felt for the blade
with his numb feet. He only wanted to dive once.
Harry put off the moment of total submersion from
second to second, gasping and shaking, until he told
himself that it must be done, gathered all his courage,
and dived.
The cold was agony: It attacked him like fire. His
brain itself seemed to have frozen as he pushed
through the dark water to the bottom and reached
out, groping for the sword. His fingers closed around
the hilt; he pulled it upward.
Then something closed tight around his neck. He
thought of water weeds, though nothing had brushed
him as he dived, and raised his empty hand to free
himself. It was not weed: The chain of the Horcrux
had tightened and was slowly constricting his
windpipe.
 
Harry kicked out wildly, trying to push himself back
to the surface, but merely propelled himself into the
rocky side of the pool. Thrashing, suffocating, he
scrabbled at the strangling chain, his frozen fingers
unable to loosen it, and now little lights were popping
inside his head, and he was going to drown, there was
nothing left, nothing he could do, and the arms that
closed around his chest were surely Death’s. ...
Choking and retching, soaking and colder than he
had ever been in his life, he came to facedown in the
snow. Somewhere close by, another person was
panting and coughing and staggering around.
Hermione had come again, as she had come when the
snake attacked. ... Yet it did not sound like her, not
with those deep coughs, not judging by the weight of
the footsteps. ...
Harry had no strength to lift his head and see his
savior’s identity. All he could do was raise a shaking
hand to his throat and feel the place where the locket
had cut tightly into his flesh. It was gone: Someone
had cut him free. Then a panting voice spoke from
over his head.
“Are — you — mental?”
Nothing but the shock of hearing that voice could
have given Harry the strength to get up. Shivering
violently, he staggered to his feet. There before him
stood Ron, fully dressed but drenched to the skin, his
hair plastered to his face, the sword of Gryffindor in
one hand and the Horcrux dangling from its broken
chain in the other.
“Why the hell,” panted Ron, holding up the Horcrux,
which swung backward and forward on its shortened
chain in some parody of hypnosis, “didn’t you take
this thing off before you dived?”
 
Harry could not answer. The silver doe was nothing,
nothing compared with Ron’s reappearance; he could
not believe it. Shuddering with cold, he caught up the
pile of clothes still lying at the water’s edge and began
to pull them on. As he dragged sweater after sweater
over his head, Harry stared at Ron, half expecting him
to have disappeared every time he lost sight of him,
and yet he had to be real: He had just dived into the
pool, he had saved Harry’s life.
“It was y-you?” Harry said at last, his teeth
chattering, his voice weaker than usual due to his
near-strangulation.
“Well, yeah,” said Ron, looking slightly confused.
“Y-you cast that doe?”
“What? No, of course not! I thought it was you doing
it!”
“My Patronus is a stag.”
“Oh yeah. I thought it looked different. No antlers.”
Harry put Hagrid’s pouch back around his neck,
pulled on a final sweater, stooped to pick up
Hermione’s wand, and faced Ron again.
“How come you’re here?”
Apparently Ron had hoped that this point would come
up later, if at all.
“Well, I’ve — you know — I’ve come back. If — ” He
cleared his throat. “You know. You still want me.”
There was a pause, in which the subject of Ron’s
departure seemed to rise like a wall between them.
 
Yet he was here. He had returned. He had just saved
Harry’s life.
Ron looked down at his hands. He seemed
momentarily surprised to see the things he was
holding.
“Oh yeah, I got it out,” he said, rather unnecessarily,
holding up the sword for Harry’s inspection. “That’s
why you jumped in, right?”
“Yeah,” said Harry. “But I don’t understand. How did
you get here? How did you find us?”
“Long story,” said Ron. “I’ve been looking for you for
hours, it’s a big forest, isn’t it? And I was just
thinking I’d have to kip under a tree and wait for
morning when I saw that deer coming and you
following.”
“You didn’t see anyone else?”
“No,” said Ron. “I — ”
But he hesitated, glancing at two trees growing close
together some yards away.
“I did think I saw something move over there, but I
was running to the pool at the time, because you’d
gone in and you hadn’t come up, so I wasn’t going to
make a detour to — hey!”
Harry was already hurrying to the place Ron had
indicated. The two oaks grew close together; there
was a gap of only a few inches between the trunks at
eye level, an ideal place to see but not be seen. The
ground around the roots, however, was free of snow,
and Harry could see no sign of footprints. He walked
 
back to where Ron stood waiting, still holding the
sword and the Horcrux.
“Anything there?” Ron asked.
“No,” said Harry.
“So how did the sword get in that pool?”
“Whoever cast the Patronus must have put it there.”
They both looked at the ornate silver sword, its rubied
hilt glinting a little in the light from Hermione’s wand.
“You reckon this is the real one?” asked Ron.
“One way to find out, isn’t there?” said Harry.
The Horcrux was still swinging from Ron’s hand. The
locket was twitching slightly. Harry knew that the
thing inside it was agitated again. It had sensed the
presence of the sword and had tried to kill Harry
rather than let him possess it. Now was not the time
for long discussions; now was the moment to destroy
the locket once and for all. Harry looked around,
holding Hermione’s wand high, and saw the place: a
flattish rock lying in the shadow of a sycamore tree.
“Come here,” he said, and he led the way, brushed
snow from the rock’s surface, and held out his hand
for the Horcrux. When Ron offered the sword,
however, Harry shook his head.
“No, you should do it.”
“Me?” said Ron, looking shocked. “Why?”
“Because you got the sword out of the pool. I think it’s
supposed to be you.”
 
He was not being kind or generous. As certainly as he
had known that the doe was benign, he knew that
Ron had to be the one to wield the sword.
Dumbledore had at least taught Harry something
about certain kinds of magic, of the incalculable
power of certain acts.
“I’m going to open it,” said Harry, “and you stab it.
Straightaway, okay? Because whatever’s in there will
put up a fight. The bit of Riddle in the diary tried to
kill me.”
“How are you going to open it?” asked Ron. He looked
terrified.
“I’m going to ask it to open, using Parseltongue,” said
Harry. The answer came so readily to his lips that he
thought that he had always known it deep down:
Perhaps it had taken his recent encounter with Nagini
to make him realize it. He looked at the serpentine S,
inlaid with glittering green stones: It was easy to
visualize it as a minuscule snake, curled upon the
cold rock.
“No!” said Ron. “No, don’t open it! I’m serious!”
“Why not?” asked Harry. “Let’s get rid of the damn
thing, it’s been months — ”
“I can’t, Harry, I’m serious — you do it — ”
“But why?”
“Because that thing’s bad for me!” said Ron, backing
away from the locket on the rock. “I can’t handle it!
I’m not making excuses, Harry, for what I was like,
but it affects me worse than it affected you and
Hermione, it made me think stuff — stuff I was
thinking anyway, but it made everything worse, I
 
can’t explain it, and then I’d take it off and I’d get my
head on straight again, and then I’d have to put the
effing thing back on — I can’t do it, Harry!”
He had backed away, the sword dragging at his side,
shaking his head.
“You can do it,” said Harry, “you can! You’ve just got
the sword, I know it’s supposed to be you who uses it.
Please, just get rid of it, Ron.”
The sound of his name seemed to act like a stimulant.
Ron swallowed, then, still breathing hard through his
long nose, moved back toward the rock.
“Tell me when,” he croaked.
“On three,” said Harry, looking back down at the
locket and narrowing his eyes, concentrating on the
letter S, imagining a serpent, while the contents of the
locket rattled like a trapped cockroach. It would have
been easy to pity it, except that the cut around
Harry’s neck still burned.
“One ... two ... three ... open.”
The last word came as a hiss and a snarl and the
golden doors of the locket swung wide with a little
click.
Behind both of the glass windows within blinked a
living eye, dark and handsome as Tom Riddle’s eyes
had been before he turned them scarlet and slit-
pupiled.
“Stab,” said Harry, holding the locket steady on the
rock.
 
Ron raised the sword in his shaking hands: The point
dangled over the frantically swiveling eyes, and Harry
gripped the locket tightly, bracing himself, already
imagining blood pouring from the empty windows.
Then a voice hissed from out of the Horcrux.
“I have seen your heart, and it is mine.”
“Don’t listen to it!” Harry said harshly. “Stab it!”
“I have seen your dreams, Ronald Weasley, and I have
seen your fears. All you desire is possible, but all that
you dread is also possible. ...”
“Stab!” shouted Harry; his voice echoed off the
surrounding trees, the sword point trembled, and Ron
gazed down into Riddle’s eyes.
“ Least loved, always, by the mother who craved a
daughter . . . Least loved, now, by the girl who prefers
your friend . . . Second best, always, eternally
overshadowed ...”
“Ron, stab it now!” Harry bellowed: He could feel the
locket quivering in his grip and was scared of what
was coming. Ron raised the sword still higher, and as
he did so, Riddle’s eyes gleamed scarlet.
Out of the locket’s two windows, out of the eyes, there
bloomed, like two grotesque bubbles, the heads of
Harry and Hermione, weirdly distorted.
Ron yelled in shock and backed away as the figures
blossomed out of the locket, first chests, then waists,
then legs, until they stood in the locket, side by side
like trees with a common root, swaying over Ron and
the real Harry, who had snatched his fingers away
from the locket as it burned, suddenly, white-hot.
 
“Ron!” he shouted, but the Riddle-Harry was now
speaking with Voldemort’s voice and Ron was gazing,
mesmerized, into its face.
“ Why return? We were better without you, happier
without you, glad of your absence. . . . We laughed at
your stupidity, your cowardice, your presumption — ”
“ Presumption?’ echoed the Riddle-Hermione, who was
more beautiful and yet more terrible than the real
Hermione: She swayed, cackling, before Ron, who
looked horrified yet transfixed, the sword hanging
pointlessly at his side. “ Who could look at you, who
would ever look at you, beside Harry Potter? What
have you ever done, compared with the Chosen One?
What are you, compared with the Boy Who Lived?”
“Ron, stab it, STAB IT!” Harry yelled, but Ron did not
move: His eyes were wide, and the Riddle-Harry and
the Riddle-Hermione were reflected in them, their hair
swirling like flames, their eyes shining red, their
voices lifted in an evil duet.
“ Your mother confessed,” sneered Riddle-Harry, while
Riddle-Hermione jeered, “that she would have
preferred me as a son, would be glad to exchange ...”
“Who wouldn’t prefer him, what woman would take
you, you are nothing, nothing, nothing to him,” crooned
Riddle-Hermione, and she stretched like a snake and
entwined herself around Riddle-Harry, wrapping him
in a close embrace: Their lips met.
On the ground in front of them, Ron’s face filled with
anguish. He raised the sword high, his arms shaking.
“Do it, Ron!” Harry yelled.
 
Ron looked toward him, and Harry thought he saw a
trace of scarlet in his eyes.
“Ron — ?”
The sword flashed, plunged: Harry threw himself out
of the way, there was a clang of metal and a long,
drawn-out scream. Harry whirled around, slipping in
the snow, wand held ready to defend himself: but
there was nothing to fight.
The monstrous versions of himself and Hermione
were gone: There was only Ron, standing there with
the sword held slackly in his hand, looking down at
the shattered remains of the locket on the flat rock.
Slowly, Harry walked back to him, hardly knowing
what to say or do. Ron was breathing heavily: His
eyes were no longer red at all, but their normal blue;
they were also wet.
Harry stooped, pretending he had not seen, and
picked up the broken Horcrux. Ron had pierced the
glass in both windows: Riddle’s eyes were gone, and
the stained silk lining of the locket was smoking
slightly. The thing that had lived in the Horcrux had
vanished; torturing Ron had been its final act.
The sword clanged as Ron dropped it. He had sunk to
his knees, his head in his arms. He was shaking, but
not, Harry realized, from cold. Harry crammed the
broken locket into his pocket, knelt down beside Ron,
and placed a hand cautiously on his shoulder. He
took it as a good sign that Ron did not throw it off.
“After you left,” he said in a low voice, grateful for the
fact that Ron’s face was hidden, “she cried for a week.
Probably longer, only she didn’t want me to see. There
 
were loads of nights when we never even spoke to
each other. With you gone ...”
He could not finish; it was only now that Ron was
here again that Harry fully realized how much his
absence had cost them.
“She’s like my sister,” he went on. “I love her like a
sister and I reckon she feels the same way about me.
It’s always been like that. I thought you knew.”
Ron did not respond, but turned his face away from
Harry and wiped his nose noisily on his sleeve. Harry
got to his feet again and walked to where Ron’s
enormous rucksack lay yards away, discarded as Ron
had run toward the pool to save Harry from drowning.
He hoisted it onto his own back and walked back to
Ron, who clambered to his feet as Harry approached,
eyes bloodshot but otherwise composed.
“I’m sorry,” he said in a thick voice. “I’m sorry I left. I
know I was a — a — ”
He looked around at the darkness, as if hoping a bad
enough word would swoop down upon him and claim
him.
“You’ve sort of made up for it tonight,” said Harry.
“Getting the sword. Finishing off the Horcrux. Saving
my life.”
“That makes me sound a lot cooler than I was,” Ron
mumbled.
“Stuff like that always sounds cooler than it really
was,” said Harry. “I’ve been trying to tell you that for
years.”
 
Simultaneously they walked forward and hugged,
Harry gripping the still-sopping back of Ron’s jacket.
“And now,” said Harry as they broke apart, “all we’ve
got to do is find the tent again.”
But it was not difficult. Though the walk through the
dark forest with the doe had seemed lengthy, with
Ron by his side the journey back seemed to take a
surprisingly short time. Harry could not wait to wake
Hermione, and it was with quickening excitement that
he entered the tent, Ron lagging a little behind him.
It was gloriously warm after the pool and the forest,
the only illumination the bluebell flames still
shimmering in a bowl on the floor. Hermione was fast
asleep, curled up under her blankets, and did not
move until Harry had said her name several times.
“Hermionel”
She stirred, then sat up quickly, pushing her hair out
of her face.
“What’s wrong? Harry? Are you all right?”
“It’s okay, everything’s fine. More than fine. I’m great.
There’s someone here.”
“What do you mean? Who — ?”
She saw Ron, who stood there holding the sword and
dripping onto the threadbare carpet. Harry backed
into a shadowy corner, slipped off Ron’s rucksack,
and attempted to blend in with the canvas.
Hermione slid out of her bunk and moved like a
sleepwalker toward Ron, her eyes upon his pale face.
She stopped right in front of him, her lips slightly
 
parted, her eyes wide. Ron gave a weak, hopeful smile
and half raised his arms.
Hermione launched herself forward and started
punching every inch of him that she could reach.
“Ouch — ow — gerroff! What the — ? Hermione —
OW!”
“You — complete — arse — Ronald — Weasley!”
She punctuated every word with a blow: Ron backed
away, shielding his head as Hermione advanced.
“You — crawl — back — here — after — weeks — and
— weeks — oh, where’s my wand?”
She looked as though ready to wrestle it out of
Harry’s hands and he reacted instinctively.
“Protegol”
The invisible shield erupted between Ron and
Hermione: The force of it knocked her backward onto
the floor. Spitting hair out of her mouth, she leapt up
again.
“Hermione!” said Harry. “Calm — ”
“I will not calm down!” she screamed. Never before
had he seen her lose control like this; she looked
quite demented. “Give me back my wand! Give it back
to me\”
“Hermione, will you please — ”
“Don’t you tell me what to do, Harry Potter!” she
screeched. “Don’t you dare! Give it back now! And
YOU!”
 
She was pointing at Ron in dire accusation: It was
like a malediction, and Harry could not blame Ron for
retreating several steps.
“I came running after you! I called you! I begged you
to come back!”
“I know,” Ron said, “Hermione, I’m sorry, I’m really —
“Oh, you’re sorry!”
She laughed, a high-pitched, out-of-control sound;
Ron looked at Harry for help, but Harry merely
grimaced his helplessness.
“You come back after weeks — weeks — and you
think it’s all going to be all right if you just say
sorry?”
“Well, what else can I say?” Ron shouted, and Harry
was glad that Ron was fighting back.
“Oh, I don’t know!” yelled Hermione with awful
sarcasm. “Rack your brains, Ron, that should only
take a couple of seconds — ”
“Hermione,” interjected Harry, who considered this a
low blow, “he just saved my — ”
“I don’t care!” she screamed. “I don’t care what he’s
done! Weeks and weeks, we could have been dead for
all he knew — ”
“I knew you weren’t dead!” bellowed Ron, drowning
her voice for the first time, and approaching as close
as he could with the Shield Charm between them.
“Harry’s all over the Prophet, all over the radio, they’re
looking for you everywhere, all these rumors and
 
mental stories, I knew I’d hear straight off if you were
dead, you don’t know what it’s been like — ”
“What it’s been like for you?”
Her voice was now so shrill only bats would be able to
hear it soon, but she had reached a level of
indignation that rendered her temporarily speechless,
and Ron seized his opportunity.
“I wanted to come back the minute I’d Disapparated,
but I walked straight into a gang of Snatchers,
Hermione, and I couldn’t go anywhere!”
“A gang of what?” asked Harry, as Hermione threw
herself down into a chair with her arms and legs
crossed so tightly it seemed unlikely that she would
unravel them for several years.
“Snatchers,” said Ron. “They’re everywhere — gangs
trying to earn gold by rounding up Muggle-borns and
blood traitors, there’s a reward from the Ministry for
everyone captured. I was on my own and I look like I
might be school age; they got really excited, thought I
was a Muggle-born in hiding. I had to talk fast to get
out of being dragged to the Ministry.”
“What did you say to them?”
“Told them I was Stan Shunpike. First person I could
think of.”
“And they believed that?”
“They weren’t the brightest. One of them was
definitely part troll, the smell off him. ...”
Ron glanced at Hermione, clearly hopeful she might
soften at this small instance of humor, but her
 
expression remained stony above her tightly knotted
limbs.
“Anyway, they had a row about whether I was Stan or
not. It was a bit pathetic to be honest, but there were
still five of them and only one of me and they’d taken
my wand. Then two of them got into a fight and while
the others were distracted I managed to hit the one
holding me in the stomach, grabbed his wand,
Disarmed the bloke holding mine, and Disapparated.
I didn’t do it so well, Splinched myself again” — Ron
held up his right hand to show two missing
fingernails; Hermione raised her eyebrows coldly —
“and I came out miles from where you were. By the
time I got back to that bit of riverbank where we’d
been ... you’d gone.”
“Gosh, what a gripping story,” Hermione said in the
lofty voice she adopted when wishing to wound. “You
must have been simply terrified. Meanwhile we went
to Godric’s Hollow and, let’s think, what happened
there, Harry? Oh yes, You-Know- Who’s snake turned
up, it nearly killed both of us, and then You-Know-
Who himself arrived and missed us by about a
second.”
“What?” Ron said, gaping from her to Harry, but
Hermione ignored him.
“Imagine losing fingernails, Harry! That really puts
our sufferings into perspective, doesn’t it?”
“Hermione,” said Harry quietly, “Ron just saved my
life.”
She appeared not to have heard him.
“One thing I would like to know, though,” she said,
fixing her eyes on a spot a foot over Ron’s head. “How
 
exactly did you find us tonight? That’s important.
Once we know, we’ll be able to make sure we’re not
visited by anyone else we don’t want to see.”
Ron glared at her, then pulled a small silver object
from his jeans pocket.
“This.”
She had to look at Ron to see what he was showing
them.
“The Deluminator?” she asked, so surprised she
forgot to look cold and fierce.
“It doesn’t just turn the lights on and off,” said Ron. “I
don’t know how it works or why it happened then and
not any other time, because I’ve been wanting to come
back ever since I left. But I was listening to the radio
really early on Christmas morning and I heard ... I
heard you.”
He was looking at Hermione.
“You heard me on the radio?” she asked
incredulously.
“No, I heard you coming out of my pocket. Your
voice,” he held up the Deluminator again, “came out
of this.”
“And what exactly did I say?” asked Hermione, her
tone somewhere between skepticism and curiosity.
“My name. ‘Ron.’ And you said ... something about a
wand. ...”
Hermione turned a fiery shade of scarlet. Harry
remembered: It had been the first time Ron’s name
 
had been said aloud by either of them since the day
he had left; Hermione had mentioned it when talking
about repairing Harry’s wand.
“So I took it out,” Ron went on, looking at the
Deluminator, “and it didn’t seem different or
anything, but I was sure I’d heard you. So I clicked it.
And the light went out in my room, but another light
appeared right outside the window.”
Ron raised his empty hand and pointed in front of
him, his eyes focused on something neither Harry nor
Hermione could see.
“It was a ball of light, kind of pulsing, and bluish, like
that light you get around a Portkey, you know?”
“Yeah,” said Harry and Hermione together
automatically.
“I knew this was it,” said Ron. “I grabbed my stuff and
packed it, then I put on my rucksack and went out
into the garden.
“The little ball of light was hovering there, waiting for
me, and when I came out it bobbed along a bit and I
followed it behind the shed and then it ... well, it went
inside me.”
“Sorry?” said Harry, sure he had not heard correctly.
“It sort of floated toward me,” said Ron, illustrating
the movement with his free index finger, “right to my
chest, and then — it just went straight through. It
was here,” he touched a point close to his heart, “I
could feel it, it was hot. And once it was inside me I
knew what I was supposed to do, I knew it would take
me where I needed to go. So I Disapparated and came
 
out on the side of a hill. There was snow everywhere.
“We were there,” said Harry. “We spent two nights
there, and the second night I kept thinking I could
hear someone moving around in the dark and calling
out!”
“Yeah, well, that would’ve been me,” said Ron. “Your
protective spells work, anyway, because I couldn’t see
you and I couldn’t hear you. I was sure you were
around, though, so in the end I got in my sleeping bag
and waited for one of you to appear. I thought you’d
have to show yourselves when you packed up the
tent.”
“No, actually,” said Hermione. “We’ve been
Disapparating under the Invisibility Cloak as an extra
precaution. And we left really early, because, as Harry
says, we’d heard somebody blundering around.”
“Well, I stayed on that hill all day,” said Ron. “I kept
hoping you’d appear. But when it started to get dark I
knew I must have missed you, so I clicked the
Deluminator again, the blue light came out and went
inside me, and I Disapparated and arrived here in
these woods. I still couldn’t see you, so I just had to
hope one of you would show yourselves in the end —
and Harry did. Well, I saw the doe first, obviously.”
“You saw the what?” said Hermione sharply.
They explained what had happened, and as the story
of the silver doe and the sword in the pool unfolded,
Hermione frowned from one to the other of them,
concentrating so hard she forgot to keep her limbs
locked together.
 
“But it must have been a Patronus!” she said.
“Couldn’t you see who was casting it? Didn’t you see
anyone? And it led you to the sword! I can’t believe
this! Then what happened?”
Ron explained how he had watched Harry jump into
the pool and had waited for him to resurface; how he
had realized that something was wrong, dived in, and
saved Harry, then returned for the sword. He got as
far as the opening of the locket, then hesitated, and
Harry cut in.
“ — and Ron stabbed it with the sword.”
“And ... and it went? Just like that?” she whispered.
“Well, it — it screamed,” said Harry with half a glance
at Ron. “Here.”
He threw the locket into her lap; gingerly she picked it
up and examined its punctured windows.
Deciding that it was at last safe to do so, Harry
removed the Shield Charm with a wave of Hermione’s
wand and turned to Ron.
“Did you just say you got away from the Snatchers
with a spare wand?”
“What?” said Ron, who had been watching Hermione
examining the locket. “Oh — oh yeah.”
He tugged open a buckle on his rucksack and pulled
a short, dark wand out of its pocket. “Here. I figured
it’s always handy to have a backup.”
“You were right,” said Harry, holding out his hand.
“Mine’s broken.”
 
“You’re kidding?” Ron said, but at that moment
Hermione got to her feet, and he looked apprehensive
again.
Hermione put the vanquished Horcrux into the
beaded bag, then climbed back into her bed and
settled down without another word.
Ron passed Harry the new wand.
“About the best you could hope for, I think,”
murmured Harry.
“Yeah,” said Ron. “Could’ve been worse. Remember
those birds she set on me?”
“I still haven’t ruled it out,” came Hermione’s muffled
voice from beneath her blankets, but Harry saw Ron
smiling slightly as he pulled his maroon pajamas out
of his rucksack.
 
XEN OPHILIUS LOVEGOOD
Harry had not expected Hermione’s anger to abate
overnight, and was therefore unsurprised that she
communicated mainly by dirty looks and pointed
silences the next morning. Ron responded by
maintaining an unnaturally somber demeanor in her
presence as an outward sign of continuing remorse.
In fact, when all three of them were together Harry
felt like the only non-mourner at a poorly attended
funeral. During those few moments he spent alone
with Harry, however (collecting water and searching
the undergrowth for mushrooms), Ron became
shamelessly cheery.
“Someone helped us,” he kept saying. “Someone sent
that doe. Someone’s on our side. One Horcrux down,
mate!”
Bolstered by the destruction of the locket, they set to
debating the possible locations of the other
Horcruxes, and even though they had discussed the
matter so often before, Harry felt optimistic, certain
that more breakthroughs would succeed the first.
 
Hermione’s sulkiness could not mar his buoyant
spirits: The sudden upswing in their fortunes, the
appearance of the mysterious doe, the recovery of
Gryffindor’s sword, and above all, Ron’s return, made
Harry so happy that it was quite difficult to maintain
a straight face.
Late in the afternoon he and Ron escaped Hermione’s
baleful presence again, and under the pretense of
scouring the bare hedges for nonexistent
blackberries, they continued their ongoing exchange
of news. Harry had finally managed to tell Ron the
whole story of his and Hermione’s various
wanderings, right up to the full story of what had
happened at Godric’s Hollow; Ron was now filling
Harry in on everything he had discovered about the
wider Wizarding world during his weeks away.
"... and how did you find out about the Taboo?” he
asked Harry after explaining the many desperate
attempts of Muggle-borns to evade the Ministry.
“The what?”
“You and Hermione have stopped saying You-Know-
Who’s name!”
“Oh, yeah. Well, it’s just a bad habit we’ve slipped
into,” said Harry. “But I haven’t got a problem calling
him V — ”
“NO!” roared Ron, causing Harry to jump into the
hedge and Hermione (nose buried in a book at the
tent entrance) to scowl over at them. “Sorry,” said
Ron, wrenching Harry back out of the brambles, “but
the name’s been jinxed, Harry, that’s how they track
people! Using his name breaks protective
enchantments, it causes some kind of magical
 
disturbance — it’s how they found us in Tottenham
Court Road!”
“Because we used his name?”
“Exactly! You’ve got to give them credit, it makes
sense. It was only people who were serious about
standing up to him, like Dumbledore, who ever dared
use it. Now they’ve put a Taboo on it, anyone who
says it is trackable — quick-and-easy way to find
Order members! They nearly got Kingsley — ”
“You’re kidding?”
“Yeah, a bunch of Death Eaters cornered him, Bill
said, but he fought his way out. He’s on the run now,
just like us.” Ron scratched his chin thoughtfully with
the end of his wand. “You don’t reckon Kingsley could
have sent that doe?”
“His Patronus is a lynx, we saw it at the wedding,
remember?”
“Oh yeah ...”
They moved farther along the hedge, away from the
tent and Hermione.
“Harry ... you don’t reckon it could’ve been
Dumbledore?”
“Dumbledore what?”
Ron looked a little embarrassed, but said in a low
voice, “Dumbledore ... the doe? I mean,” Ron was
watching Harry out of the corners of his eyes, “he had
the real sword last, didn’t he?”
 
Harry did not laugh at Ron, because he understood
too well the longing behind the question. The idea
that Dumbledore had managed to come back to them,
that he was watching over them, would have been
inexpressibly comforting. He shook his head.
“Dumbledore’s dead,” he said. “I saw it happen, I saw
the body. He’s definitely gone. Anyway, his Patronus
was a phoenix, not a doe.”
“Patronuses can change, though, can’t they?” said
Ron. “Tonks’s changed, didn’t it?”
“Yeah, but if Dumbledore was alive, why wouldn’t he
show himself? Why wouldn’t he just hand us the
sword?”
“Search me,” said Ron. “Same reason he didn’t give it
to you while he was alive? Same reason he left you an
old Snitch and Hermione a book of kids’ stories?”
“Which is what?” asked Harry, turning to look Ron
full in the face, desperate for the answer.
“I dunno,” said Ron. “Sometimes I’ve thought, when
I’ve been a bit hacked off, he was having a laugh or —
or he just wanted to make it more difficult. But I don’t
think so, not anymore. He knew what he was doing
when he gave me the Deluminator, didn’t he? He —
well,” Ron’s ears turned bright red and he became
engrossed in a tuft of grass at his feet, which he
prodded with his toe, “he must’ve known I’d run out
on you.”
“No,” Harry corrected him. “He must’ve known you’d
always want to come back.”
Ron looked grateful, but still awkward. Partly to
change the subject, Harry said, “Speaking of
 
Dumbledore, have you heard what Skeeter wrote
about him?”
“Oh yeah,” said Ron at once, “people are talking about
it quite a lot. ’Course, if things were different, it’d be
huge news, Dumbledore being pals with Grindelwald,
but now it’s just something to laugh about for people
who didn’t like Dumbledore, and a bit of a slap in the
face for everyone who thought he was such a good
bloke. I don’t know that it’s such a big deal, though.
He was really young when they — ”
“Our age,” said Harry, just as he had retorted to
Hermione, and something in his face seemed to
decide Ron against pursuing the subject.
A large spider sat in the middle of a frosted web in the
brambles. Harry took aim at it with the wand Ron had
given him the previous night, which Hermione had
since condescended to examine, and had decided was
made of blackthorn.
“Engorgio.”
The spider gave a little shiver, bouncing slightly in the
web. Harry tried again. This time the spider grew
slightly larger.
“Stop that,” said Ron sharply. “I’m sorry I said
Dumbledore was young, okay?”
Harry had forgotten Ron’s hatred of spiders.
“Sorry — Reducio.”
The spider did not shrink. Harry looked down at the
blackthorn wand. Every minor spell he had cast with
it so far that day had seemed less powerful than those
he had produced with his phoenix wand. The new one
 
felt intrusively unfamiliar, like having somebody else’s
hand sewn to the end of his arm.
“You just need to practice,” said Hermione, who had
approached them noiselessly from behind and had
stood watching anxiously as Harry tried to enlarge
and reduce the spider. “It’s all a matter of confidence,
Harry.”
He knew why she wanted it to be all right: She still
felt guilty about breaking his wand. He bit back the
retort that sprang to his lips, that she could take the
blackthorn wand if she thought it made no difference,
and he would have hers instead. Keen for them all to
be friends again, however, he agreed; but when Ron
gave Hermione a tentative smile, she stalked off and
vanished behind her book once more.
All three of them returned to the tent when darkness
fell, and Harry took first watch. Sitting in the
entrance, he tried to make the blackthorn wand
levitate small stones at his feet; but his magic still
seemed clumsier and less powerful than it had done
before. Hermione was lying on her bunk reading,
while Ron, after many nervous glances up at her, had
taken a small wooden wireless out of his rucksack
and started to try and tune it.
“There’s this one program,” he told Harry in a low
voice, “that tells the news like it really is. All the
others are on You- Know- Who’s side and are following
the Ministry line, but this one ... you wait till you
hear it, it’s great. Only they can’t do it every night,
they have to keep changing locations in case they’re
raided, and you need a password to tune in. ...
Trouble is, I missed the last one. ...”
He drummed lightly on the top of the radio with his
wand, muttering random words under his breath. He
 
threw Hermione many covert glances, plainly fearing
an angry outburst, but for all the notice she took of
him he might not have been there. For ten minutes or
so Ron tapped and muttered, Hermione turned the
pages of her book, and Harry continued to practice
with the blackthorn wand.
Finally Hermione climbed down from her bunk. Ron
ceased his tapping at once.
“If it’s annoying you, 111 stop!” he told Hermione
nervously.
Hermione did not deign to respond, but approached
Harry.
“We need to talk,” she said.
He looked at the book still clutched in her hand. It
was The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore.
“What?” he said apprehensively. It flew through his
mind that there was a chapter on him in there; he
was not sure he felt up to hearing Rita’s version of his
relationship with Dumbledore. Hermione ’s answer,
however, was completely unexpected.
“I want to go and see Xenophilius Lovegood.”
He stared at her.
“Sorry?”
“Xenophilius Lovegood. Luna’s father. I want to go
and talk to him!”
“Er — why?”
 
She took a deep breath, as though bracing herself,
and said, “It’s that mark, the mark in Beedle the
Bard. Look at this!”
She thrust The Life and Lies ofAlbus Dumbledore
under Harry’s unwilling eyes and he saw a
photograph of the original letter that Dumbledore had
written Grindelwald, with Dumbledore ’s familiar thin,
slanting handwriting. He hated seeing absolute proof
that Dumbledore really had written those words, that
they had not been Rita’s invention.
“The signature,” said Hermione. “Look at the
signature, Harry!”
He obeyed. For a moment he had no idea what she
was talking about, but, looking more closely with the
aid of his lit wand, he saw that Dumbledore had
replaced the A of Albus with a tiny version of the
same triangular mark inscribed upon The Tales of
Beedle the Bard.
“Er — what are you — ?” said Ron tentatively, but
Hermione quelled him with a look and turned back to
Harry.
“It keeps cropping up, doesn’t it?” she said. “I know
Viktor said it was Grindelwald ’s mark, but it was
definitely on that old grave in Godric’s Hollow, and
the dates on the headstone were long before
Grindelwald came along! And now this! Well, we can’t
ask Dumbledore or Grindelwald what it means — I
don’t even know whether Grindelwald’s still alive —
but we can ask Mr. Lovegood. He was wearing the
symbol at the wedding. I’m sure this is important,
Harry!”
Harry did not answer immediately. He looked into her
intense, eager face and then out into the surrounding
 
darkness, thinking. After a long pause he said,
“Hermione, we don’t need another Godric’s Hollow.
We talked ourselves into going there, and — ”
“But it keeps appearing, Harry! Dumbledore left me
The Tales of Beedle the Bard, how do you know we’re
not supposed to find out about the sign?”
“Here we go again!” Harry felt slightly exasperated.
“We keep trying to convince ourselves Dumbledore left
us secret signs and clues — ”
“The Deluminator turned out to be pretty useful,”
piped up Ron. “I think Hermione’s right, I think we
ought to go and see Lovegood.”
Harry threw him a dark look. He was quite sure that
Ron’s support of Hermione had little to do with a
desire to know the meaning of the triangular rune.
“It won’t be like Godric’s Hollow,” Ron added,
“Lovegood’s on your side, Harry, The Quibbler’s been
for you all along, it keeps telling everyone they’ve got
to help you!”
“I’m sure this is important!” said Hermione earnestly.
“But don’t you think if it was, Dumbledore would
have told me about it before he died?”
“Maybe ... maybe it’s something you need to find out
for yourself,” said Hermione with a faint air of
clutching at straws.
“Yeah,” said Ron sycophantically, “that makes sense.”
“No, it doesn’t,” snapped Hermione, “but I still think
we ought to talk to Mr. Lovegood. A symbol that links
 
Dumbledore, Grindelwald, and Godric’s Hollow?
Harry, I’m sure we ought to know about this!”
“I think we should vote on it,” said Ron. “Those in
favor of going to see Lovegood — ”
His hand flew into the air before Hermione’s. Her lips
quivered suspiciously as she raised her own.
“Outvoted, Harry, sorry,” said Ron, clapping him on
the back.
“Fine,” said Harry, half amused, half irritated. “Only,
once we’ve seen Lovegood, let’s try and look for some
more Horcruxes, shall we? Where do the Lovegoods
live, anyway? Do either of you know?”
“Yeah, they’re not far from my place,” said Ron. “I
dunno exactly where, but Mum and Dad always point
toward the hills whenever they mention them.
Shouldn’t be hard to find.”
When Hermione had returned to her bunk, Harry
lowered his voice.
“You only agreed to try and get back in her good
books.”
“All’s fair in love and war,” said Ron brightly, “and
this is a bit of both. Cheer up, it’s the Christmas
holidays, Luna ’ll be home!”
They had an excellent view of the village of Ottery St.
Catchpole from the breezy hillside to which they
Disapparated next morning. From their high vantage
point the village looked like a collection of toy houses
in the great slanting shafts of sunlight stretching to
earth in the breaks between clouds. They stood for a
minute or two looking toward the Burrow, their hands
 
shadowing their eyes, but all they could make out
were the high hedges and trees of the orchard, which
afforded the crooked little house protection from
Muggle eyes.
“It’s weird, being this near, but not going to visit,”
said Ron.
“Well, it’s not like you haven’t just seen them. You
were there for Christmas,” said Hermione coldly.
“I wasn’t at the Burrow!” said Ron with an
incredulous laugh. “Do you think I was going to go
back there and tell them all I’d walked out on you?
Yeah, Fred and George would’ve been great about it.
And Ginny, she’d have been really understanding.”
“But where have you been, then?” asked Hermione,
surprised.
“Bill and Fleur’s new place. Shell Cottage. Bill’s
always been decent to me. He — he wasn’t impressed
when he heard what I’d done, but he didn’t go on
about it. He knew I was really sorry. None of the rest
of the family know I was there. Bill told Mum he and
Fleur weren’t going home for Christmas because they
wanted to spend it alone. You know, first holiday after
they were married. I don’t think Fleur minded. You
know how much she hates Celestina Warbeck.”
Ron turned his back on the Burrow.
“Let’s try up here,” he said, leading the way over the
top of the hill.
They walked for a few hours, Harry, at Hermione ’s
insistence, hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak. The
cluster of low hills appeared to be uninhabited apart
from one small cottage, which seemed deserted.
 
“Do you think it’s theirs, and they’ve gone away for
Christmas?” said Hermione, peering through the
window at a neat little kitchen with geraniums on the
windowsill. Ron snorted.
“Listen, I’ve got a feeling you’d be able to tell who lived
there if you looked through the Lovegoods’ window.
Let’s try the next lot of hills.”
So they Disapparated a few miles farther north.
“Aha!” shouted Ron, as the wind whipped their hair
and clothes. Ron was pointing upward, toward the top
of the hill on which they had appeared, where a most
strange-looking house rose vertically against the sky,
a great black cylinder with a ghostly moon hanging
behind it in the afternoon sky. “That’s got to be
Luna’s house, who else would live in a place like that?
It looks like a giant rook!”
“It’s nothing like a bird,” said Hermione, frowning at
the tower.
“I was talking about a chess rook,” said Ron. “A castle
to you.”
Ron’s legs were the longest and he reached the top of
the hill first. When Harry and Hermione caught up
with him, panting and clutching stitches in their
sides, they found him grinning broadly.
“It’s theirs,” said Ron. “Look.”
Three hand-painted signs had been tacked to a
broken-down gate. The first read,
THE QUIBBLER. EDITOR: X. LOVEGOOD
the second,
 
PICK YOUR OWN MISTLETOE
the third,
KEEP OFF THE DIRIGIBLE PLUMS
The gate creaked as they opened it. The zigzagging
path leading to the front door was overgrown with a
variety of odd plants, including a bush covered in the
orange radishlike fruit Luna sometimes wore as
earrings. Harry thought he recognized a Snargaluff
and gave the wizened stump a wide berth. Two aged
crab apple trees, bent with the wind, stripped of
leaves but still heavy with berry-sized red fruits and
bushy crowns of white-beaded mistletoe, stood
sentinel on either side of the front door. A little owl
with a slightly flattened, hawklike head peered down
at them from one of the branches.
“You’d better take off the Invisibility Cloak, Harry,”
said Hermione. “It’s you Mr. Lovegood wants to help,
not us.”
He did as she suggested, handing her the Cloak to
stow in the beaded bag. She then rapped three times
on the thick black door, which was studded with iron
nails and bore a knocker shaped like an eagle.
Barely ten seconds passed, then the door was flung
open and there stood Xenophilius Lovegood, barefoot
and wearing what appeared to be a stained nightshirt
His long white candyfloss hair was dirty and
unkempt. Xenophilius had been positively dapper at
Bill and Fleur’s wedding by comparison.
“What? What is it? Who are you? What do you want?”
he cried in a high-pitched, querulous voice, looking
first at Hermione, then at Ron, and finally at Harry,
 
upon which his mouth fell open in a perfect, comical
O.
“Hello, Mr. Lovegood,” said Harry, holding out his
hand. “I’m Harry, Harry Potter.”
Xenophilius did not take Harry’s hand, although the
eye that was not pointing inward at his nose slid
straight to the scar on Harry’s forehead.
“Would it be okay if we came in?” asked Harry.
“There’s something we’d like to ask you.”
“I ... I’m not sure that’s advisable,” whispered
Xenophilius. He swallowed and cast a quick look
around the garden. “Rather a shock ... My word ... I
... I’m afraid I don’t really think I ought to — ”
“It won’t take long,” said Harry, slightly disappointed
by this less-than-warm welcome.
“I — oh, all right then. Come in, quickly. QuicklyV’
They were barely over the threshold when Xenophilius
slammed the door shut behind them. They were
standing in the most peculiar kitchen Harry had ever
seen. The room was perfectly circular, so that it felt
like being inside a giant pepper pot. Everything was
curved to fit the walls — the stove, the sink, and the
cupboards — and all of it had been painted with
flowers, insects, and birds in bright primary colors.
Harry thought he recognized Luna’s style: The effect,
in such an enclosed space, was slightly
overwhelming.
In the middle of the floor, a wrought-iron spiral
staircase led to the upper levels. There was a great
deal of clattering and banging coming from overhead:
Harry wondered what Luna could be doing.
 
“You’d better come up,” said Xenophilius, still looking
extremely uncomfortable, and he led the way.
The room above seemed to be a combination of living
room and workplace, and as such, was even more
cluttered than the kitchen. Though much smaller and
entirely round, the room somewhat resembled the
Room of Requirement on the unforgettable occasion
that it had transformed itself into a gigantic labyrinth
comprised of centuries of hidden objects. There were
piles upon piles of books and papers on every surface.
Delicately made models of creatures Harry did not
recognize, all flapping wings or snapping jaws, hung
from the ceiling.
Luna was not there: The thing that was making such
a racket was a wooden object covered in magically
turning cogs and wheels. It looked like the bizarre
offspring of a workbench and a set of old shelves, but
after a moment Harry deduced that it was an old-
fashioned printing press, due to the fact that it was
churning out Quibblers.
“Excuse me,” said Xenophilius, and he strode over to
the machine, seized a grubby tablecloth from beneath
an immense number of books and papers, which all
tumbled onto the floor, and threw it over the press,
somewhat muffling the loud bangs and clatters. He
then faced Harry.
“Why have you come here?”
Before Harry could speak, however, Hermione let out
a small cry of shock.
“Mr. Lovegood — what’s that?”
She was pointing at an enormous, gray spiral horn,
not unlike that of a unicorn, which had been
 
mounted on the wall, protruding several feet into the
room.
“It is the horn of a Crumple-Horned Snorkack,” said
Xenophilius.
“No it isn’t!” said Hermione.
“Hermione,” muttered Harry, embarrassed, “now’s not
the moment — ”
“But Harry, it’s an Erumpent horn! It’s a Class B
Tradeable Material and it’s an extraordinarily
dangerous thing to have in a house!”
“How d’you know it’s an Erumpent horn?” asked Ron,
edging away from the horn as fast as he could, given
the extreme clutter of the room.
“There’s a description in Fantastic Beasts and Where
to Find Them .! Mr. Lovegood, you need to get rid of it
straightaway, don’t you know it can explode at the
slightest touch?”
“The Crumple-Horned Snorkack,” said Xenophilius
very clearly, a mulish look upon his face, “is a shy
and highly magical creature, and its horn — ”
“Mr. Lovegood, I recognize the grooved markings
around the base, that’s an Erumpent horn and it’s
incredibly dangerous — I don’t know where you got it
“I bought it,” said Xenophilius dogmatically, “two
weeks ago, from a delightful young wizard who knew
of my interest in the exquisite Snorkack. A Christmas
surprise for my Luna. Now,” he said, turning to
Harry, “why exactly have you come here, Mr. Potter?”
 
“We need some help,” said Harry, before Hermione
could start again.
“Ah,” said Xenophilius. “Help. Hmm.”
His good eye moved again to Harry’s scar. He seemed
simultaneously terrified and mesmerized.
“Yes. The thing is ... helping Harry Potter ... rather
dangerous ...”
“Aren’t you the one who keeps telling everyone it’s
their first duty to help Harry?” said Ron. “In that
magazine of yours?”
Xenophilius glanced behind him at the concealed
printing press, still banging and clattering beneath
the tablecloth.
“Er — yes, I have expressed that view. However — ”
“That’s for everyone else to do, not you personally?”
said Ron.
Xenophilius did not answer. He kept swallowing, his
eyes darting between the three of them. Harry had the
impression that he was undergoing some painful
internal struggle.
“Where’s Luna?” asked Hermione. “Let’s see what she
thinks.”
Xenophilius gulped. He seemed to be steeling himself.
Finally he said in a shaky voice difficult to hear over
the noise of the printing press, “Luna is down at the
stream, fishing for Freshwater Plimpies. She ... she
will like to see you. I’ll go and call her and then —
yes, very well. I shall try to help you.”
 
He disappeared down the spiral staircase and they
heard the front door open and close. They looked at
each other.
“Cowardly old wart,” said Ron. “Luna’s got ten times
his guts.”
“He’s probably worried about what’ll happen to them
if the Death Eaters find out I was here,” said Harry.
“Well, I agree with Ron,” said Hermione. “Awful old
hypocrite, telling everyone else to help you and trying
to worm out of it himself. And for heaven’s sake keep
away from that horn.”
Harry crossed to the window on the far side of the
room. He could see a stream, a thin, glittering ribbon
lying far below them at the base of the hill. They were
very high up; a bird fluttered past the window as he
stared in the direction of the Burrow, now invisible
beyond another line of hills. Ginny was over there
somewhere. They were closer to each other today than
they had been since Bill and Fleur’s wedding, but she
could have no idea he was gazing toward her now,
thinking of her. He supposed he ought to be glad of it;
anyone he came into contact with was in danger,
Xenophilius’s attitude proved that.
He turned away from the window and his gaze fell
upon another peculiar object standing upon the
cluttered, curved sideboard: a stone bust of a
beautiful but austere-looking witch wearing a most
bizarre-looking headdress. Two objects that
resembled golden ear trumpets curved out from the
sides. A tiny pair of glittering blue wings was stuck to
a leather strap that ran over the top of her head,
while one of the orange radishes had been stuck to a
second strap around her forehead.
 
“Look at this,” said Harry.
“Fetching,” said Ron. “Surprised he didn’t wear that
to the wedding.”
They heard the front door close, and a moment later
Xenophilius had climbed back up the spiral staircase
into the room, his thin legs now encased in
Wellington boots, bearing a tray of ill-assorted
teacups and a steaming teapot.
“Ah, you have spotted my pet invention,” he said,
shoving the tray into Hermione’s arms and joining
Harry at the statue’s side. “Modeled, fittingly enough,
upon the head of the beautiful Rowena Ravenclaw.
‘Wit beyond measure is man’s greatest treasureV ”
He indicated the objects like ear trumpets.
“These are the Wrackspurt siphons — to remove all
sources of distraction from the thinker’s immediate
area. Here,” he pointed out the tiny wings, “a billywig
propeller, to induce an elevated frame of mind.
Finally,” he pointed to the orange radish, “the
Dirigible Plum, so as to enhance the ability to accept
the extraordinary.”
Xenophilius strode back to the tea tray, which
Hermione had managed to balance precariously on
one of the cluttered side tables.
“May I offer you all an infusion of Gurdyroots?” said
Xenophilius. “We make it ourselves.” As he started to
pour out the drink, which was as deeply purple as
beetroot juice, he added, “Luna is down beyond
Bottom Bridge, she is most excited that you are here.
She ought not to be too long, she has caught nearly
enough Plimpies to make soup for all of us. Do sit
down and help yourselves to sugar.
 
“Now,” he removed a tottering pile of papers from an
armchair and sat down, his Wellingtoned legs
crossed, “how may I help you, Mr. Potter?”
“Well,” said Harry, glancing at Hermione, who nodded
encouragingly, “it’s about that symbol you were
wearing around your neck at Bill and Fleur’s
wedding, Mr. Lovegood. We wondered what it meant.”
Xenophilius raised his eyebrows.
“Are you referring to the sign of the Deathly Hallows?”
 
THE TALE OF THE THREE
BROTHERS
Harry turned to look at Ron and Hermione. Neither of
them seemed to have understood what Xenophilius
had said either.
“The Deathly Hallows?”
“That’s right,” said Xenophilius. “You haven’t heard of
them? I’m not surprised. Very, very few wizards
believe. Witness that knuckle-headed young man at
your brother’s wedding,” he nodded at Ron, “who
attacked me for sporting the symbol of a well-known
Dark wizard! Such ignorance. There is nothing Dark
about the Hallows — at least, not in that crude sense.
One simply uses the symbol to reveal oneself to other
believers, in the hope that they might help one with
the Quest.”
He stirred several lumps of sugar into his Gurdyroot
infusion and drank some.
 
“I’m sorry,” said Harry. “I still don’t really
understand.”
To be polite, he took a sip from his cup too, and
almost gagged: The stuff was quite disgusting, as
though someone had liquidized bogey-flavored Every
Flavor Beans.
“Well, you see, believers seek the Deathly Hallows,”
said Xenophilius, smacking his lips in apparent
appreciation of the Gurdyroot infusion.
“But what are the Deathly Hallows?” asked Hermione.
Xenophilius set aside his empty teacup.
“I assume that you are all familiar with “The Tale of
the Three Brothers’?”
Harry said, “No,” but Ron and Hermione both said,
“Yes.” Xenophilius nodded gravely.
“Well, well, Mr. Potter, the whole thing starts with
The Tale of the Three Brothers’ ... I have a copy
somewhere. ...”
He glanced vaguely around the room, at the piles of
parchment and books, but Hermione said, “I’ve got a
copy, Mr. Lovegood, I’ve got it right here.”
And she pulled out The Tales of Beedle the Bard from
the small, beaded bag.
“The original?” inquired Xenophilius sharply, and
when she nodded, he said, “Well then, why don’t you
read it aloud? Much the best way to make sure we all
understand.”
 
“Er ... all right,” said Hermione nervously. She opened
the book, and Harry saw that the symbol they were
investigating headed the top of the page as she gave a
little cough, and began to read.
“ ‘There were once three brothers who were traveling
along a lonely, winding road at twilight — ’ ”
“Midnight, our mum always told us,” said Ron, who
had stretched out, arms behind his head, to listen.
Hermione shot him a look of annoyance.
“Sorry, I just think it’s a bit spookier if it’s midnight!”
said Ron.
“Yeah, because we really need a bit more fear in our
lives,” said Harry before he could stop himself.
Xenophilius did not seem to be paying much
attention, but was staring out of the window at the
sky. “Go on, Hermione.”
“ ‘In time, the brothers reached a river too deep to
wade through and too dangerous to swim across.
However, these brothers were learned in the magical
arts, and so they simply waved their wands and made
a bridge appear across the treacherous water. They
were halfway across it when they found their path
blocked by a hooded figure.
“ ‘And Death spoke to them — ’ ”
“Sorry,” interjected Harry, “but Death spoke to them?”
“It’s a fairy tale, Harry!”
“Right, sorry. Go on.”
“ ‘And Death spoke to them. He was angry that he had
been cheated out of three new victims, for travelers
 
usually drowned in the river. But Death was cunning.
He pretended to congratulate the three brothers upon
their magic, and said that each had earned a prize for
having been clever enough to evade him.
“ ‘So the oldest brother, who was a combative man,
asked for a wand more powerful than any in existence:
a wand that must always win duels for its owner, a
wand worthy of a wizard who had conquered Death!
So Death crossed to an elder tree on the banks of the
river, fashioned a wand from a branch that hung there,
and gave it to the oldest brother.
“ ‘Then the second brother, who was an arrogant man,
decided that he wanted to humiliate Death still further,
and asked for the power to recall others from Death. So
Death picked up a stone from the riverbank and gave it
to the second brother, and told him that the stone
would have the power to bring back the dead.
“ ‘And then Death asked the third and youngest
brother what he would like. The youngest brother was
the humblest and also the wisest of the brothers, and
he did not trust Death. So he asked for something that
would enable him to go forth from that place without
being followed by Death. And Death, most unwillingly,
handed over his own Cloak of Invisibility.’ ”
“Death’s got an Invisibility Cloak?” Harry interrupted
again.
“So he can sneak up on people,” said Ron.
“Sometimes he gets bored of running at them,
flapping his arms and shrieking ... sorry, Hermione.”
“ ‘Then Death stood aside and allowed the three
brothers to continue on their way, and they did so,
talking with wonder of the adventure they had had,
and admiring Death’s gifts.
 
“ ‘In due course the brothers separated, each for his
own destination.
“ ‘The first brother traveled on for a week or more, and
reaching a distant village, sought out a fellow wizard
with whom he had a quarrel. Naturally, with the Elder
Wand as his weapon, he could not fail to win the duel
that followed. Leaving his enemy dead upon the floor,
the oldest brother proceeded to an inn, where he
boasted loudly of the powerful wand he had snatched
from Death himself, and of how it made him invincible.
“ ‘That very night, another wizard crept upon the oldest
brother as he lay, wine-sodden, upon his bed. The thief
took the wand and, for good measure, slit the oldest
brother’s throat.
“ ‘And so Death took the first brother for his own.
“ ‘Meanwhile, the second brother journeyed to his own
home, where he lived alone. Here he took out the stone
that had the power to recall the dead, and turned it
thrice in his hand. To his amazement and his delight,
the figure of the girl he had once hoped to marry,
before her untimely death, appeared at once before
him.
“ ‘Yet she was sad and cold, separated from him as by
a veil. Though she had returned to the mortal world,
she did not truly belong there and suffered. Finally the
second brother, driven mad with hopeless longing,
killed himself so as truly to join her.
“ ‘And so Death took the second brother for his own.
“ ‘But though Death searched for the third brother for
many years, he was never able to find him. It was only
when he had attained a great age that the youngest
brother finally took off the Cloak of Invisibility and
 
gave it to his son. And then he greeted Death as an old
friend, and went with him gladly, and, equals, they
departed this life. ’ ”
Hermione closed the book. It was a moment or two
before Xenophilius seemed to realize that she had
stopped reading, then he withdrew his gaze from the
window and said, “Well, there you are.”
“Sorry?” said Hermione, sounding confused.
“Those are the Deathly Hallows,” said Xenophilius.
He picked up a quill from a packed table at his elbow,
and pulled a torn piece of parchment from between
more books.
“The Elder Wand,” he said, and he drew a straight
vertical line upon the parchment. “The Resurrection
Stone,” he said, and he added a circle on top of the
line. “The Cloak of Invisibility,” he finished, enclosing
both line and circle in a triangle, to make the symbol
that so intrigued Hermione. “Together,” he said, “the
Deathly Hallows.”
“But there’s no mention of the words ‘Deathly
Hallows’ in the story,” said Hermione.
“Well, of course not,” said Xenophilius, maddeningly
smug. “That is a children’s tale, told to amuse rather
than to instruct. Those of us who understand these
matters, however, recognize that the ancient story
refers to three objects, or Hallows, which, if united,
will make the possessor master of Death.”
There was a short silence in which Xenophilius
glanced out of the window. Already the sun was low
in the sky.
 
“Luna ought to have enough Plimpies soon,” he said
quietly.
“When you say ‘master of Death’ — ” said Ron.
“Master,” said Xenophilius, waving an airy hand.
“Conqueror. Vanquisher. Whichever term you prefer.”
“But then ... do you mean ...” said Hermione slowly,
and Harry could tell that she was trying to keep any
trace of skepticism out of her voice, “that you believe
these objects — these Hallows — actually exist?”
Xenophilius raised his eyebrows again.
“Well, of course.”
“But,” said Hermione, and Harry could hear her
restraint starting to crack, “Mr. Lovegood, how can
you possibly believe — ?”
“Luna has told me all about you, young lady,” said
Xenophilius. “You are, I gather, not unintelligent, but
painfully limited. Narrow. Close-minded.”
“Perhaps you ought to try on the hat, Hermione,” said
Ron, nodding toward the ludicrous headdress. His
voice shook with the strain of not laughing.
“Mr. Lovegood,” Hermione began again. “We all know
that there are such things as Invisibility Cloaks. They
are rare, but they exist. But — ”
“Ah, but the Third Hallow is a true Cloak of
Invisibility, Miss Granger! I mean to say, it is not a
traveling cloak imbued with a Disillusionment Charm,
or carrying a Bedazzling Hex, or else woven from
Demiguise hair, which will hide one initially but fade
with the years until it turns opaque. We are talking
 
about a cloak that really and truly renders the wearer
completely invisible, and endures eternally, giving
constant and impenetrable concealment, no matter
what spells are cast at it. How many cloaks have you
ever seen like that, Miss Granger?”
Hermione opened her mouth to answer, then closed it
again, looking more confused than ever. She, Harry,
and Ron glanced at one another, and Harry knew that
they were all thinking the same thing. It so happened
that a cloak exactly like the one Xenophilius had just
described was in the room with them at that very
moment.
“Exactly,” said Xenophilius, as if he had defeated
them all in reasoned argument. “None of you have
ever seen such a thing. The possessor would be
immeasurably rich, would he not?”
He glanced out of the window again. The sky was now
tinged with the faintest trace of pink.
“All right,” said Hermione, disconcerted. “Say the
Cloak existed ... what about the stone, Mr. Lovegood?
The thing you call the Resurrection Stone?”
“What of it?”
“Well, how can that be real?”
“Prove that it is not,” said Xenophilius.
Hermione looked outraged.
“But that’s — I’m sorry, but that’s completely
ridiculous! How can I possibly prove it doesn’t exist?
Do you expect me to get hold of — of all the pebbles
in the world and test them? I mean, you could claim
 
that anything’s real if the only basis for believing in it
is that nobody’s proved it doesn’t exist!”
“Yes, you could,” said Xenophilius. “I am glad to see
that you are opening your mind a little.”
“So the Elder Wand,” said Harry quickly, before
Hermione could retort, “you think that exists too?”
“Oh, well, in that case there is endless evidence,” said
Xenophilius. “The Elder Wand is the Hallow that is
most easily traced, because of the way in which it
passes from hand to hand.”
“Which is what?” asked Harry.
“Which is that the possessor of the wand must
capture it from its previous owner, if he is to be truly
master of it,” said Xenophilius. “Surely you have
heard of the way the wand came to Egbert the
Egregious, after his slaughter of Emeric the Evil? Of
how Godelot died in his own cellar after his son,
Hereward, took the wand from him? Of the dreadful
Loxias, who took the wand from Barnabas Deverill,
whom he had killed? The bloody trail of the Elder
Wand is splattered across the pages of Wizarding
history.”
Harry glanced at Hermione. She was frowning at
Xenophilius, but she did not contradict him.
“So where do you think the Elder Wand is now?”
asked Ron.
“Alas, who knows?” said Xenophilius, as he gazed out
of the window. “Who knows where the Elder Wand
lies hidden? The trail goes cold with Arcus and Livius.
Who can say which of them really defeated Loxias,
 
and which took the wand? And who can say who may
have defeated them? History, alas, does not tell us.”
There was a pause. Finally Hermione asked stiffly,
“Mr. Lovegood, does the Peverell family have anything
to do with the Deathly Hallows?”
Xenophilius looked taken aback as something shifted
in Harry’s memory, but he could not locate it. Peverell
...he had heard that name before. ...
“But you have been misleading me, young woman!”
said Xenophilius, now sitting up much straighter in
his chair and goggling at Hermione. “I thought you
were new to the Hallows Quest! Many of us Questers
believe that the Peverells have everything —
everything ! — to do with the Hallows!”
“Who are the Peverells?” asked Ron.
“That was the name on the grave with the mark on it,
in Godric’s Hollow,” said Hermione, still watching
Xenophilius. “Ignotus Peverell.”
“Exactly!” said Xenophilius, his forefinger raised
pedantically. “The sign of the Deathly Hallows on
Ignotus ’s grave is conclusive proof!”
“Of what?” asked Ron.
“Why, that the three brothers in the story were
actually the three Peverell brothers, Antioch, Cadmus,
and Ignotus! That they were the original owners of the
Hallows!”
With another glance at the window he got to his feet,
picked up the tray, and headed for the spiral
staircase.
 
“You will stay for dinner?” he called, as he vanished
downstairs again. “Everybody always requests our
recipe for Freshwater Plimpy soup.”
“Probably to show the Poisoning Department at St.
Mungo’s,” said Ron under his breath.
Harry waited until they could hear Xenophilius
moving about in the kitchen downstairs before
speaking.
“What do you think?” he asked Hermione.
“Oh, Harry,” she said wearily, “it’s a pile of utter
rubbish. This can’t be what the sign really means.
This must just be his weird take on it. What a waste
of time.”
“I s’pose this is the man who brought us Crumple-
Horned Snorkacks,” said Ron.
“You don’t believe it either?” Harry asked him.
“Nah, that story’s just one of those things you tell
kids to teach them lessons, isn’t it? ‘Don’t go looking
for trouble, don’t pick fights, don’t go messing around
with stuff that’s best left alone! Just keep your head
down, mind your own business, and you’ll be okay’
Come to think of it,” Ron added, “maybe that story’s
why elder wands are supposed to be unlucky.”
“What are you talking about?”
“One of those superstitions, isn’t it? ‘May-born
witches will marry Muggles.’ ‘Jinx by twilight, undone
by midnight.’ ‘Wand of elder, never prosper.’ You
must’ve heard them. My mum’s full of them.”
 
“Harry and I were raised by Muggles,” Hermione
reminded him. “We were taught different
superstitions.” She sighed deeply as a rather pungent
smell drifted up from the kitchen. The one good thing
about her exasperation with Xenophilius was that it
seemed to have made her forget that she was annoyed
at Ron. “I think you’re right,” she told him. “It’s just a
morality tale, it’s obvious which gift is best, which one
you’d choose — ”
The three of them spoke at the same time; Hermione
said, “the Cloak,” Ron said, “the wand,” and Harry
said, “the stone.”
They looked at each other, half surprised, half
amused.
“You’re supposed to say the Cloak,” Ron told
Hermione, “but you wouldn’t need to be invisible if
you had the wand. An unbeatable wand, Hermione,
come on!”
“We’ve already got an Invisibility Cloak,” said Harry.
“And it’s helped us rather a lot, in case you hadn’t
noticed!” said Hermione. “Whereas the wand would be
bound to attract trouble — ”
“Only if you shouted about it,” argued Ron. “Only if
you were prat enough to go dancing around, waving it
over your head, and singing, ‘I’ve got an unbeatable
wand, come and have a go if you think you’re hard
enough.’ As long as you kept your trap shut — ”
“Yes, but could you keep your trap shut?” said
Hermione, looking skeptical. “You know, the only true
thing he said to us was that there have been stories
about extra- powerful wands for hundreds of years.”
 
“There have?” asked Harry.
Hermione looked exasperated: The expression was so
endearingly familiar that Harry and Ron grinned at
each other.
“The Deathstick, the Wand of Destiny, they crop up
under different names through the centuries, usually
in the possession of some Dark wizard who’s boasting
about them. Professor Binns mentioned some of
them, but — oh, it’s all nonsense. Wands are only as
powerful as the wizards who use them. Some wizards
just like to boast that theirs are bigger and better
than other people’s.”
“But how do you know,” said Harry, “that those
wands — the Deathstick and the Wand of Destiny —
aren’t the same wand, surfacing over the centuries
under different names?”
“What, and they’re all really the Elder Wand, made by
Death?” said Ron.
Harry laughed: The strange idea that had occurred to
him was, after all, ridiculous. His wand, he reminded
himself, had been of holly, not elder, and it had been
made by Ollivander, whatever it had done that night
Voldemort had pursued him across the skies. And if it
had been unbeatable, how could it have been broken?
“So why would you take the stone?” Ron asked him.
“Well, if you could bring people back, we could have
Sirius ... Mad-Eye ... Dumbledore ... my parents. ...”
Neither Ron nor Hermione smiled.
“But according to Beedle the Bard, they wouldn’t
want to come back, would they?” said Harry, thinking
 
about the tale they had just heard. “I don’t suppose
there have been loads of other stories about a stone
that can raise the dead, have there?” he asked
Hermione.
“No,” she replied sadly. “I don’t think anyone except
Mr. Lovegood could kid themselves that’s possible.
Beedle probably took the idea from the Sorcerer’s
Stone; you know, instead of a stone to make you
immortal, a stone to reverse death.”
The smell from the kitchen was getting stronger: It
was something like burning underpants. Harry
wondered whether it would be possible to eat enough
of whatever Xenophilius was cooking to spare his
feelings.
“What about the Cloak, though?” said Ron slowly.
“Don’t you realize, he’s right? I’ve got so used to
Harry’s Cloak and how good it is, I never stopped to
think. I’ve never heard of one like Harry’s. It’s
infallible. We’ve never been spotted under it — ”
“Of course not — we’re invisible when we’re under it,
Ron!”
“But all the stuff he said about other cloaks, and
they’re not exactly ten a Knut, you know, is true! It’s
never occurred to me before, but I’ve heard stuff
about charms wearing off cloaks when they get old, or
them being ripped apart by spells so they’ve got holes
in. Harry’s was owned by his dad, so it’s not exactly
new, is it, but it’s just ... perfect!”
“Yes, all right, but Ron, the stone ...”
As they argued in whispers, Harry moved around the
room, only half listening. Reaching the spiral stair, he
raised his eyes absently to the next level and was
 
distracted at once. His own face was looking back at
him from the ceiling of the room above.
After a moment’s bewilderment, he realized that it
was not a mirror, but a painting. Curious, he began
to climb the stairs.
“Harry, what are you doing? I don’t think you should
look around when he’s not here!”
But Harry had already reached the next level.
Luna had decorated her bedroom ceiling with five
beautifully painted faces: Harry, Ron, Hermione,
Ginny, and Neville. They were not moving as the
portraits at Hogwarts moved, but there was a certain
magic about them all the same: Harry thought they
breathed. What appeared to be fine golden chains
wove around the pictures, linking them together, but
after examining them for a minute or so, Harry
realized that the chains were actually one word,
repeated a thousand times in golden ink: friends . . .
friends . . . friends . . .
Harry felt a great rush of affection for Luna. He looked
around the room. There was a large photograph
beside the bed, of a young Luna and a woman who
looked very like her. They were hugging. Luna looked
rather better-groomed in this picture than Harry had
ever seen her in life. The picture was dusty. This
struck Harry as slightly odd. He stared around.
Something was wrong. The pale blue carpet was also
thick with dust. There were no clothes in the
wardrobe, whose doors stood ajar. The bed had a
cold, unfriendly look, as though it had not been slept
in for weeks. A single cobweb stretched over the
nearest window, across a bloodred sky.
 
“What’s wrong?” Hermione asked as Harry descended
the staircase, but before he could respond,
Xenophilius reached the top of the stairs from the
kitchen, now holding a tray laden with bowls.
“Mr. Lovegood,” said Harry. “Where’s Luna?”
“Excuse me?”
“Where’s Luna?”
Xenophilius halted on the top step.
“I — I’ve already told you. She is down at Bottom
Bridge, fishing for Plimpies.”
“So why have you only laid that tray for four?”
Xenophilius tried to speak, but no sound came out.
The only noise was the continued chugging of the
printing press, and a slight rattle from the tray as
Xenophilius ’s hands shook.
“I don’t think Luna’s been here for weeks,” said Harry.
“Her clothes are gone, her bed hasn’t been slept in.
Where is she? And why do you keep looking out of the
window?”
Xenophilius dropped the tray: The bowls bounced and
smashed. Harry, Ron, and Hermione drew their
wands: Xenophilius froze, his hand about to enter his
pocket. At that moment the printing press gave a
huge bang and numerous Quibblers came streaming
across the floor from underneath the tablecloth; the
press fell silent at last.
Hermione stooped down and picked up one of the
magazines, her wand still pointing at Mr. Lovegood.
 
“Harry, look at this.”
He strode over to her as quickly as he could through
all the clutter. The front of The Quibbler carried his
own picture, emblazoned with the words
UNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE and captioned with
the reward money.
“The Quibbler’s going for a new angle, then?” Harry
asked coldly, his mind working very fast. “Is that
what you were doing when you went into the garden,
Mr. Lovegood? Sending an owl to the Ministry?”
Xenophilius licked his lips.
“They took my Luna,” he whispered. “Because of what
I’ve been writing. They took my Luna and I don’t know
where she is, what they’ve done to her. But they
might give her back to me if I — if I — ”
“Hand over Harry?” Hermione finished for him.
“No deal,” said Ron flatly. “Get out of the way, we’re
leaving.”
Xenophilius looked ghastly, a century old, his lips
drawn back into a dreadful leer.
“They will be here at any moment. I must save Luna. I
cannot lose Luna. You must not leave.”
He spread his arms in front of the staircase, and
Harry had a sudden vision of his mother doing the
same thing in front of his crib.
“Don’t make us hurt you,” Harry said. “Get out of the
way, Mr. Lovegood.”
“HARRY!” Hermione screamed.
 
Figures on broomsticks were flying past the windows.
As the three of them looked away from him,
Xenophilius drew his wand. Harry realized their
mistake just in time: He launched himself sideways,
shoving Ron and Hermione out of harm’s way as
Xenophilius’s Stunning Spell soared across the room
and hit the Erumpent horn.
There was a colossal explosion. The sound of it
seemed to blow the room apart: Fragments of wood
and paper and rubble flew in all directions, along with
an impenetrable cloud of thick white dust. Harry flew
through the air, then crashed to the floor, unable to
see as debris rained upon him, his arms over his
head. He heard Hermione’s scream, Ron’s yell, and a
series of sickening metallic thuds, which told him
that Xenophilius had been blasted off his feet and
fallen backward down the spiral stairs.
Half buried in rubble, Harry tried to raise himself: He
could barely breathe or see for dust. Half of the
ceiling had fallen in, and the end of Luna’s bed was
hanging through the hole. The bust of Rowena
Ravenclaw lay beside him with half its face missing,
fragments of torn parchment were floating through
the air, and most of the printing press lay on its side,
blocking the top of the staircase to the kitchen. Then
another white shape moved close by, and Hermione,
coated in dust like a second statue, pressed her finger
to her lips.
The door downstairs crashed open.
“Didn’t I tell you there was no need to hurry,
Travers?” said a rough voice. “Didn’t 1 tell you this
nutter was just raving as usual?”
There was a bang and a scream of pain from
Xenophilius.
 
“No ... no ... upstairs ... Potter!”
“I told you last week, Lovegood, we weren’t coming
back for anything less than some solid information!
Remember last week? When you wanted to swap your
daughter for that stupid bleeding headdress? And the
week before” — another bang, another squeal —
“when you thought we’d give her back if you offered
us proof there are Crumple” — bang — “Headed” —
bang — “Snorkacks?”
“No — no — I beg you!” sobbed Xenophilius. “It really
is Potter! Really!”
“And now it turns out you only called us here to try
and blow us up!” roared the Death Eater, and there
was a volley of bangs interspersed with squeals of
agony from Xenophilius.
“The place looks like it’s about to fall in, Selwyn,” said
a cool second voice, echoing up the mangled
staircase. “The stairs are completely blocked. Could
try clearing it? Might bring the place down.”
“You lying piece of filth,” shouted the wizard named
Selwyn. “You’ve never seen Potter in your life, have
you? Thought you’d lure us here to kill us, did you?
And you think you’ll get your girl back like this?”
“I swear ... I swear ... Potter’s upstairs!”
“Homenum revelio,” said the voice at the foot of the
stairs.
Harry heard Hermione gasp, and he had the odd
sensation that something was swooping low over him,
immersing his body in its shadow.
 
“There’s someone up there all right, Selwyn,” said the
second man sharply.
“It’s Potter, I tell you, it’s Potter!” sobbed Xenophilius.
“Please ... please ... give me Luna, just let me have
Luna. ...”
“You can have your little girl, Lovegood,” said Selwyn,
“if you get up those stairs and bring me down Harry
Potter. But if this is a plot, if it’s a trick, if you’ve got
an accomplice waiting up there to ambush us, we’ll
see if we can spare a bit of your daughter for you to
bury.”
Xenophilius gave a wail of fear and despair. There
were scurryings and scrapings: Xenophilius was
trying to get through the debris on the stairs.
“Come on,” Harry whispered, “we’ve got to get out of
here.”
He started to dig himself out under cover of all the
noise Xenophilius was making on the staircase. Ron
was buried deepest: Harry and Hermione climbed, as
quietly as they could, over all the wreckage to where
he lay, trying to prise a heavy chest of drawers off his
legs. While Xenophilius ’s banging and scraping drew
nearer and nearer, Hermione managed to free Ron
with the use of a Hover Charm.
“All right,” breathed Hermione, as the broken printing
press blocking the top of the stairs began to tremble;
Xenophilius was feet away from them. She was still
white with dust. “Do you trust me, Harry?”
Harry nodded.
“Okay then,” Hermione whispered, “give me the
Invisibility Cloak. Ron, you’re going to put it on.”
 
“Me? But Harry — ”
“Please, Ron\ Harry, hold on tight to my hand, Ron,
grab my shoulder.”
Harry held out his left hand. Ron vanished beneath
the Cloak. The printing press blocking the stairs was
vibrating: Xenophilius was trying to shift it using a
Hover Charm. Harry did not know what Hermione
was waiting for.
“Hold tight,” she whispered. “Hold tight ... any second
Xenophilius’s paper- white face appeared over the top
of the sideboard.
“Obliviate\” cried Hermione, pointing her wand first
into his face, then at the floor beneath them.
“Deprimo\”
She had blasted a hole in the sitting room floor. They
fell like boulders, Harry still holding onto her hand for
dear life; there was a scream from below, and he
glimpsed two men trying to get out of the way as vast
quantities of rubble and broken furniture rained all
around them from the shattered ceiling. Hermione
twisted in midair and the thundering of the collapsing
house rang in Harry’s ears as she dragged him once
more into darkness.
 
THE DEATHLY HALLOWS
Harry fell, panting, onto grass and scrambled up at
once. They seemed to have landed in the corner of a
field at dusk; Hermione was already running in a
circle around them, waving her wand.
“Protego Totalum ... Salvio Hexia ...”
“That treacherous old bleeder!” Ron panted, emerging
from beneath the Invisibility Cloak and throwing it to
Harry. “Hermione, you’re a genius, a total genius, I
can’t believe we got out of that!”
“ Cave Inimicum ... Didn’t I say it was an Erumpent
horn, didn’t I tell him? And now his house has been
blown apart!”
“Serves him right,” said Ron, examining his torn jeans
and the cuts to his legs. “What d’you reckon they’ll do
to him?”
“Oh, I hope they don’t kill him!” groaned Hermione.
“That’s why I wanted the Death Eaters to get a
 
glimpse of Harry before we left, so they knew
Xenophilius hadn’t been lying!”
“Why hide me, though?” asked Ron.
“You’re supposed to be in bed with spattergroit, Ron!
They’ve kidnapped Luna because her father
supported Harry! What would happen to your family if
they knew you’re with him?”
“But what about your mum and dad?”
“They’re in Australia,” said Hermione. “They should
be all right. They don’t know anything.”
“You’re a genius,” Ron repeated, looking awed.
“Yeah, you are, Hermione,” agreed Harry fervently. “I
don’t know what we’d do without you.”
She beamed, but became solemn at once.
“What about Luna?”
“Well, if they’re telling the truth and she’s still alive —
” began Ron.
“Don’t say that, don’t say it!” squealed Hermione.
“She must be alive, she must!”
“Then she’ll be in Azkaban, I expect,” said Ron.
“Whether she survives the place, though ... Loads
don’t. ...”
“She will,” said Harry. He could not bear to
contemplate the alternative. “She’s tough, Luna,
much tougher than you’d think. She’s probably
teaching all the inmates about Wrackspurts and
Nargles.”
 
“I hope you’re right,” said Hermione. She passed a
hand over her eyes. “I’d feel so sorry for Xenophilius if
“ — if he hadn’t just tried to sell us to the Death
Eaters, yeah,” said Ron.
They put up the tent and retreated inside it, where
Ron made them tea. After their narrow escape, the
chilly, musty old place felt like home: safe, familiar,
and friendly.
“Oh, why did we go there?” groaned Hermione after a
few minutes’ silence. “Harry, you were right, it was
Godric’s Hollow all over again, a complete waste of
time! The Deathly Hallows ... such rubbish ...
although actually,” a sudden thought seemed to have
struck her, “he might have made it all up, mightn’t
he? He probably doesn’t believe in the Deathly
Hallows at all, he just wanted to keep us talking until
the Death Eaters arrived!”
“I don’t think so,” said Ron. “It’s a damn sight harder
making stuff up when you’re under stress than you’d
think. I found that out when the Snatchers caught
me. It was much easier pretending to be Stan,
because I knew a bit about him, than inventing a
whole new person. Old Lovegood was under loads of
pressure, trying to make sure we stayed put. I reckon
he told us the truth, or what he thinks is the truth,
just to keep us talking.”
“Well, I don’t suppose it matters,” sighed Hermione.
“Even if he was being honest, I never heard such a lot
of nonsense in all my life.”
“Hang on, though,” said Ron. “The Chamber of
Secrets was supposed to be a myth, wasn’t it?”
 
“But the Deathly Hallows can’t exist, Ron!”
“You keep saying that, but one of them can,” said
Ron. “Harry’s Invisibility Cloak — ”
“ The Tale of the Three Brothers’ is a story,” said
Hermione firmly. “A story about how humans are
frightened of death. If surviving was as simple as
hiding under the Invisibility Cloak, we’d have
everything we need already!”
“I don’t know. We could do with an unbeatable wand,”
said Harry, turning the blackthorn wand he so
disliked over in his fingers.
“There’s no such thing, Harry!”
“You said there have been loads of wands — the
Deathstick and whatever they were called — ”
“All right, even if you want to kid yourself the Elder
Wand’s real, what about the Resurrection Stone?” Her
fingers sketched quotation marks around the name,
and her tone dripped sarcasm. “No magic can raise
the dead, and that’s that!”
“When my wand connected with You-Know-Who’s, it
made my mum and dad appear ... and Cedric ...”
“But they weren’t really back from the dead, were
they?” said Hermione. “Those kinds of — of pale
imitations aren’t the same as truly bringing someone
back to life.”
“But she, the girl in the tale, didn’t really come back,
did she? The story says that once people are dead,
they belong with the dead. But the second brother
still got to see her and talk to her, didn’t he? He even
lived with her for a while. ...”
 
He saw concern and something less easily definable
in Hermione’s expression. Then, as she glanced at
Ron, Harry realized that it was fear: He had scared
her with his talk of living with dead people.
“So that Peverell bloke who’s buried in Godric’s
Hollow,” he said hastily, trying to sound robustly
sane, “you don’t know anything about him, then?”
“No,” she replied, looking relieved at the change of
subject. “I looked him up after I saw the mark on his
grave; if he’d been anyone famous or done anything
important, I’m sure he’d be in one of our books. The
only place I’ve managed to find the name ‘Peverell’ is
Nature’s Nobility: A Wizarding Genealogy. I borrowed
it from Kreacher,” she explained as Ron raised his
eyebrows. “It lists the pure-blood families that are
now extinct in the male line. Apparently the Peverells
were one of the earliest families to vanish.”
“ ‘Extinct in the male line’?” repeated Ron.
“It means the name’s died out,” said Hermione,
“centuries ago, in the case of the Peverells. They could
still have descendants, though, they’d just be called
something different.”
And then it came to Harry in one shining piece, the
memory that had stirred at the sound of the name
“Peverell”: a filthy old man brandishing an ugly ring
in the face of a Ministry official, and he cried aloud,
“Marvolo Gaunt!”
“Sorry?” said Ron and Hermione together.
“Marvolo Gaunti You -Know- Who’s grandfather! In the
Pensieve! With Dumbledore! Marvolo Gaunt said he
was descended from the Peverells!”
 
Ron and Hermione looked bewildered.
“The ring, the ring that became the Horcrux, Marvolo
Gaunt said it had the Peverell coat of arms on it! I
saw him waving it in the bloke from the Ministry’s
face, he nearly shoved it up his nose!”
“The Peverell coat of arms?” said Hermione sharply.
“Could you see what it looked like?”
“Not really,” said Harry, trying to remember. “There
was nothing fancy on there, as far as I could see;
maybe a few scratches. I only ever saw it really close
up after it had been cracked open.”
Harry saw Hermione ’s comprehension in the sudden
widening of her eyes. Ron was looking from one to the
other, astonished.
“Blimey ... You reckon it was this sign again? The
sign of the Hallows?”
“Why not?” said Harry excitedly. “Marvolo Gaunt was
an ignorant old git who lived like a pig, all he cared
about was his ancestry. If that ring had been passed
down through the centuries, he might not have
known what it really was. There were no books in that
house, and trust me, he wasn’t the type to read fairy
tales to his kids. He’d have loved to think the
scratches on the stone were a coat of arms, because
as far as he was concerned, having pure blood made
you practically royal.”
“Yes ... and that’s all very interesting,” said Hermione
cautiously, “but Harry, if you’re thinking what I think
you’re think — ”
 
“Well, why not? Why not?” said Harry, abandoning
caution. “It was a stone, wasn’t it?” He looked at Ron
for support. “What if it was the Resurrection Stone?”
Ron’s mouth fell open.
“Blimey — but would it still work if Dumbledore broke
— ?”
“Work? Work? Ron, it never worked! There’s no such
thing as a Resurrection Stone\”
Hermione had leapt to her feet, looking exasperated
and angry. “Harry, you’re trying to fit everything into
the Hallows story — ”
“Fit everything in?” he repeated. “Hermione, it fits of
its own accord! I know the sign of the Deathly Hallows
was on that stone! Gaunt said he was descended from
the Peverells!”
“A minute ago you told us you never saw the mark on
the stone properly!”
“Where d’you reckon the ring is now?” Ron asked
Harry. “What did Dumbledore do with it after he
broke it open?”
But Harry’s imagination was racing ahead, far beyond
Ron and Hermione ’s. ...
Three objects, or Hallows, which, if united, will make
the possessor master of Death . . . Master . . . Conqueror
... Vanquisher ... The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death. . . .
And he saw himself, possessor of the Hallows, facing
Voldemort, whose Horcruxes were no match ...
Neither can live while the other survives. ... Was this
 
the answer? Hallows versus Horcruxes? Was there a
way, after all, to ensure that he was the one who
triumphed? If he were the master of the Deathly
Hallows, would he be safe?
“Harry?”
But he scarcely heard Hermione: He had pulled out
his Invisibility Cloak and was running it through his
fingers, the cloth supple as water, light as air. He had
never seen anything to equal it in his nearly seven
years in the Wizarding world. The Cloak was exactly
what Xenophilius had described: A cloak that really
and truly renders the wearer completely invisible, and
endures eternally, giving constant and impenetrable
concealment, no matter what spells are cast at it ...
And then, with a gasp, he remembered —
“Dumbledore had my Cloak the night my parents
died!”
His voice shook and he could feel the color in his face,
but he did not care.
“My mum told Sirius that Dumbledore borrowed the
Cloak! This is why! He wanted to examine it, because
he thought it was the third Hallow! Ignotus Peverell is
buried in Godric’s Hollow. ...” Harry was walking
blindly around the tent, feeling as though great new
vistas of truth were opening all around him. “He’s my
ancestor! I’m descended from the third brother! It all
makes sense!”
He felt armed in certainty, in his belief in the Hallows,
as if the mere idea of possessing them was giving him
protection, and he felt joyous as he turned back to
the other two.
 
“Harry,” said Hermione again, but he was busy
undoing the pouch around his neck, his fingers
shaking hard.
“Read it,” he told her, pushing his mother’s letter into
her hand. “Read it! Dumbledore had the Cloak,
Hermione! Why else would he want it? He didn’t need
a Cloak, he could perform a Disillusionment Charm
so powerful that he made himself completely invisible
without one!”
Something fell to the floor and rolled, glittering, under
a chair: He had dislodged the Snitch when he pulled
out the letter. He stooped to pick it up, and then the
newly tapped spring of fabulous discoveries threw
him another gift, and shock and wonder erupted
inside him so that he shouted out.
“IT’S IN HERE! He left me the ring — it’s in the
Snitch!”
“You — you reckon?”
He could not understand why Ron looked taken
aback. It was so obvious, so clear to Harry:
Everything fit, everything. . . . His Cloak was the third
Hallow, and when he discovered how to open the
Snitch he would have the second, and then all he
needed to do was find the first Hallow, the Elder
Wand, and then —
But it was as though a curtain fell on a lit stage: All
his excitement, all his hope and happiness were
extinguished at a stroke, and he stood alone in the
darkness, and the glorious spell was broken.
“That’s what he’s after.”
 
The change in his voice made Ron and Hermione look
even more scared.
“You-Know-Who’s after the Elder Wand.”
He turned his back on their strained, incredulous
faces. He knew it was the truth. It all made sense.
Voldemort was not seeking a new wand; he was
seeking an old wand, a very old wand indeed. Harry
walked to the entrance of the tent, forgetting about
Ron and Hermione as he looked out into the night,
thinking. ...
Voldemort had been raised in a Muggle orphanage.
Nobody could have told him The Tales of Beedle the
Bard when he was a child, any more than Harry had
heard them. Hardly any wizards believed in the
Deathly Hallows. Was it likely that Voldemort knew
about them?
Harry gazed into the darkness. ... If Voldemort had
known about the Deathly Hallows, surely he would
have sought them, done anything to possess them:
three objects that made the possessor master of
Death? If he had known about the Deathly Hallows,
he might not have needed Horcruxes in the first
place. Didn’t the simple fact that he had taken a
Hallow, and turned it into a Horcrux, demonstrate
that he did not know this last great Wizarding secret?
Which meant that Voldemort sought the Elder Wand
without realizing its full power, without
understanding that it was one of three . . . for the
wand was the Hallow that could not be hidden, whose
existence was best known. ... The bloody trail of the
Elder Wand is splattered across the pages of
Wizarding history . . .
 
Harry watched the cloudy sky, curves of smoke-gray
and silver sliding over the face of the white moon. He
felt lightheaded with amazement at his discoveries.
He turned back into the tent. It was a shock to see
Ron and Hermione standing exactly where he had left
them, Hermione still holding Lily’s letter, Ron at her
side looking slightly anxious. Didn’t they realize how
far they had traveled in the last few minutes?
“This is it,” Harry said, trying to bring them inside the
glow of his own astonished certainty. “This explains
everything. The Deathly Hallows are real, and I’ve got
one — maybe two — ”
He held up the Snitch.
“ — and You-Know-Who’s chasing the third, but he
doesn’t realize ... he just thinks it’s a powerful wand
“Harry,” said Hermione, moving across to him and
handing him back Lily’s letter, “I’m sorry, but I think
you’ve got this wrong, all wrong.”
“But don’t you see? It all fits — ”
“No, it doesn’t,” she said. “It doesn’t , Harry, you’re
just getting carried away. Please,” she said as he
started to speak, “please just answer me this: If the
Deathly Hallows really existed, and Dumbledore knew
about them, knew that the person who possessed all
three of them would be master of Death — Harry, why
wouldn’t he have told you? Why?”
He had his answer ready.
“But you said it, Hermione! You’ve got to find out
about them for yourself! It’s a Quest!”
 
“But I only said that to try and persuade you to come
to the Lovegoods’!” cried Hermione in exasperation. “I
didn’t really believe it!”
Harry took no notice.
“Dumbledore usually let me find out stuff for myself.
He let me try my strength, take risks. This feels like
the kind of thing he’d do.”
“Harry, this isn’t a game, this isn’t practice! This is
the real thing, and Dumbledore left you very clear
instructions: Find and destroy the Horcruxes! That
symbol doesn’t mean anything, forget the Deathly
Hallows, we can’t afford to get sidetracked — ”
Harry was barely listening to her. He was turning the
Snitch over and over in his hands, half expecting it to
break open, to reveal the Resurrection Stone, to prove
to Hermione that he was right, that the Deathly
Hallows were real.
She appealed to Ron.
“You don’t believe in this, do you?”
Harry looked up. Ron hesitated.
“I dunno ... I mean ... bits of it sort of fit together,”
said Ron awkwardly. “But when you look at the whole
thing ...” He took a deep breath. “I think we’re
supposed to get rid of Horcruxes, Harry. That’s what
Dumbledore told us to do. Maybe ... maybe we should
forget about this Hallows business.”
“Thank you, Ron,” said Hermione. “I’ll take first
watch.”
 
And she strode past Harry and sat down in the tent
entrance, bringing the action to a fierce full stop.
But Harry hardly slept that night. The idea of the
Deathly Hallows had taken possession of him, and he
could not rest while agitating thoughts whirled
through his mind: the wand, the stone, and the
Cloak, if he could just possess them all. ...
I open at the close. ... But what was ‘the close’? Why
couldn’t he have the stone now? If only he had the
stone, he could ask Dumbledore these questions in
person . . . and Harry murmured words to the Snitch
in the darkness, trying everything, even Parseltongue,
but the golden ball would not open. ...
And the wand, the Elder Wand, where was that
hidden? Where was Voldemort searching now? Harry
wished his scar would burn and show him
Voldemort’s thoughts, because for the first time ever,
he and Voldemort were united in wanting the very
same thing. . . . Hermione would not like that idea, of
course. ... But then, she did not believe ...
Xenophilius had been right, in a way . . . Limited.
Narrow. Close-minded. The truth was that she was
scared of the idea of the Deathly Hallows, especially of
the Resurrection Stone ... and Harry pressed his
mouth again to the Snitch, kissing it, nearly
swallowing it, but the cold metal did not yield. ...
It was nearly dawn when he remembered Luna, alone
in a cell in Azkaban, surrounded by dementors, and
he suddenly felt ashamed of himself. He had forgotten
all about her in his feverish contemplation of the
Hallows. If only they could rescue her; but dementors
in those numbers would be virtually unassailable.
Now he came to think about it, he had not yet tried
casting a Patronus with the blackthorn wand. ... He
must try that in the morning. . . .
 
If only there was a way of getting a better wand . . .
And desire for the Elder Wand, the Deathstick,
unbeatable, invincible, swallowed him once more. ...
They packed up the tent next morning and moved on
through a dreary shower of rain. The downpour
pursued them to the coast, where they pitched the
tent that night, and persisted through the whole
week, through sodden landscapes that Harry found
bleak and depressing. He could think only of the
Deathly Hallows. It was as though a flame had been
lit inside him that nothing, not Hermione ’s flat
disbelief nor Ron’s persistent doubts, could
extinguish. And yet the fiercer the longing for the
Hallows burned inside him, the less joyful it made
him. He blamed Ron and Hermione: Their determined
indifference was as bad as the relentless rain for
dampening his spirits, but neither could erode his
certainty, which remained absolute. Harry’s belief in
and longing for the Hallows consumed him so much
that he felt quite isolated from the other two and their
obsession with the Horcruxes.
“Obsession?” said Hermione in a low fierce voice,
when Harry was careless enough to use the word one
evening, after Hermione had told him off for his lack
of interest in locating more Horcruxes. “We’re not the
ones with an obsession, Harry! We’re the ones trying
to do what Dumbledore wanted us to do!”
But he was impervious to the veiled criticism.
Dumbledore had left the sign of the Hallows for
Hermione to decipher, and he had also, Harry
remained convinced of it, left the Resurrection Stone
hidden in the golden Snitch. Neither can live while the
other survives. ... master of Death ... Why didn’t Ron
and Hermione understand?
 
“ ‘The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death,’ ”
Harry quoted calmly.
“I thought it was You-Know-Who we were supposed to
be fighting?” Hermione retorted, and Harry gave up
on her.
Even the mystery of the silver doe, which the other
two insisted on discussing, seemed less important to
Harry now, a vaguely interesting sideshow. The only
other thing that mattered to him was that his scar
had begun to prickle again, although he did all he
could to hide this fact from the other two. He sought
solitude whenever it happened, but was disappointed
by what he saw. The visions he and Voldemort were
sharing had changed in quality; they had become
blurred, shifting as though they were moving in and
out of focus. Harry was just able to make out the
indistinct features of an object that looked like a
skull, and something like a mountain that was more
shadow than substance. Used to images sharp as
reality, Harry was disconcerted by the change. He was
worried that the connection between himself and
Voldemort had been damaged, a connection that he
both feared and, whatever he had told Hermione,
prized. Somehow Harry connected these unsatisfying,
vague images with the destruction of his wand, as if it
was the blackthorn wand’s fault that he could no
longer see into Voldemort’s mind as well as before.
As the weeks crept on, Harry could not help but
notice, even through his new self-absorption, that
Ron seemed to be taking charge. Perhaps because he
was determined to make up for having walked out on
them, perhaps because Harry’s descent into
listlessness galvanized his dormant leadership
qualities, Ron was the one now encouraging and
exhorting the other two into action.
 
“Three Horcruxes left,” he kept saying. “We need a
plan of action, come on! Where haven’t we looked?
Let’s go through it again. The orphanage ...”
Diagon Alley, Hogwarts, the Riddle House, Borgin and
Burkes, Albania, every place that they knew Tom
Riddle had ever lived or worked, visited or murdered,
Ron and Hermione raked over them again, Harry
joining in only to stop Hermione pestering him. He
would have been happy to sit alone in silence, trying
to read Voldemort’s thoughts, to find out more about
the Elder Wand, but Ron insisted on journeying to
ever more unlikely places simply, Harry was aware, to
keep them moving.
“You never know,” was Ron’s constant refrain. “Upper
Flagley is a Wizarding village, he might’ve wanted to
live there. Let’s go and have a poke around.”
These frequent forays into Wizarding territory brought
them within occasional sight of Snatchers.
“Some of them are supposed to be as bad as Death
Eaters,” said Ron. “The lot that got me were a bit
pathetic, but Bill reckons some of them are really
dangerous. They said on Potterwatch — ”
“On what?” said Harry.
“ Potterwatch , didn’t I tell you that’s what it was
called? The program I keep trying to get on the radio,
the only one that tells the truth about what’s going
on! Nearly all the programs are following You-Know-
Who’s line, all except Potterwatch. I really want you to
hear it, but it’s tricky tuning in. ...”
Ron spent evening after evening using his wand to
beat out various rhythms on top of the wireless while
the dials whirled. Occasionally they would catch
 
snatches of advice on how to treat dragon pox, and
once a few bars of “A Cauldron Full of Hot Strong
Love.” While he tapped, Ron continued to try to hit on
the correct password, muttering strings of random
words under his breath.
“They’re normally something to do with the Order,” he
told them. “Bill had a real knack for guessing them.
I’m bound to get one in the end. ...”
But not until March did luck favor Ron at last. Harry
was sitting in the tent entrance, on guard duty,
staring idly at a clump of grape hyacinths that had
forced their way through the chilly ground, when Ron
shouted excitedly from inside the tent.
“I’ve got it, I’ve got it! Password was Altars’! Get in
here, Harry!”
Roused for the first time in days from his
contemplation of the Deathly Hallows, Harry hurried
back inside the tent to find Ron and Hermione
kneeling on the floor beside the little radio. Hermione,
who had been polishing the sword of Gryffindor just
for something to do, was sitting open-mouthed,
staring at the tiny speaker, from which a most
familiar voice was issuing.
"... apologize for our temporary absence from the
airwaves, which was due to a number of house calls
in our area by those charming Death Eaters.”
“But that’s Lee Jordan!” said Hermione.
“I know!” beamed Ron. “Cool, eh?”
"... now found ourselves another secure location,” Lee
was saying, “and I’m pleased to tell you that two of
 
our regular contributors have joined me here this
evening. Evening, boys!”
“Hi.”
“Evening, River.”
“ ‘River,’ that’s Lee,” Ron explained. “They’ve all got
code names, but you can usually tell — ”
“Shh!” said Hermione.
“But before we hear from Royal and Romulus,” Lee
went on, “let’s take a moment to report those deaths
that the Wizarding Wireless Network News and Daily
Prophet don’t think important enough to mention. It is
with great regret that we inform our listeners of the
murders of Ted Tonks and Dirk Cresswell.”
Harry felt a sick, swooping in his belly. He, Ron, and
Hermione gazed at one another in horror.
“A goblin by the name of Gornuk was also killed. It is
believed that Muggle-born Dean Thomas and a
second goblin, both believed to have been traveling
with Tonks, Cresswell, and Gornuk, may have
escaped. If Dean is listening, or if anyone has any
knowledge of his whereabouts, his parents and sisters
are desperate for news.
“Meanwhile, in Gaddley, a Muggle family of five has
been found dead in their home. Muggle authorities
are attributing the deaths to a gas leak, but members
of the Order of the Phoenix inform me that it was the
Killing Curse — more evidence, as if it were needed, of
the fact that Muggle slaughter is becoming little more
than a recreational sport under the new regime.
 
“Finally, we regret to inform our listeners that the
remains of Bathilda Bagshot have been discovered in
Godric’s Hollow. The evidence is that she died several
months ago. The Order of the Phoenix informs us that
her body showed unmistakable signs of injuries
inflicted by Dark Magic.
“Listeners, I’d like to invite you now to join us in a
minute’s silence in memory of Ted Tonks, Dirk
Cresswell, Bathilda Bagshot, Gornuk, and the
unnamed, but no less regretted, Muggles murdered
by the Death Eaters.”
Silence fell, and Harry, Ron, and Hermione did not
speak. Half of Harry yearned to hear more, half of him
was afraid of what might come next. It was the first
time he had felt fully connected to the outside world
for a long time.
“Thank you,” said Lee’s voice. “And now we turn to
regular contributor Royal, for an update on how the
new Wizarding order is affecting the Muggle world.”
“Thanks, River,” said an unmistakable voice, deep,
measured, reassuring.
“Kingsley!” burst out Ron.
“We know!” said Hermione, hushing him.
“Muggles remain ignorant of the source of their
suffering as they continue to sustain heavy
casualties,” said Kingsley. “However, we continue to
hear truly inspirational stories of wizards and witches
risking their own safety to protect Muggle friends and
neighbors, often without the Muggles’ knowledge. I’d
like to appeal to all our listeners to emulate their
example, perhaps by casting a protective charm over
 
any Muggle dwellings in your street. Many lives could
be saved if such simple measures are taken.”
“And what would you say, Royal, to those listeners
who reply that in these dangerous times, it should be
Wizards first’?” asked Lee.
“I’d say that it’s one short step from Wizards first’ to
‘Purebloods first,’ and then to ‘Death Eaters,’ ” replied
Kingsley. “We’re all human, aren’t we? Every human
life is worth the same, and worth saving.”
“Excellently put, Royal, and you’ve got my vote for
Minister of Magic if ever we get out of this mess,” said
Lee. “And now, over to Romulus for our popular
feature ‘Pals of Potter. ’ ”
“Thanks, River,” said another very familiar voice; Ron
started to speak, but Hermione forestalled him in a
whisper.
“We know it’s Lupin\”
“Romulus, do you maintain, as you have every time
you’ve appeared on our program, that Harry Potter is
still alive?”
“I do,” said Lupin firmly. “There is no doubt at all in
my mind that his death would be proclaimed as
widely as possible by the Death Eaters if it had
happened, because it would strike a deadly blow at
the morale of those resisting the new regime. The Boy
Who Lived’ remains a symbol of everything for which
we are fighting: the triumph of good, the power of
innocence, the need to keep resisting.”
A mixture of gratitude and shame welled up in Harry.
Had Lupin forgiven him, then, for the terrible things
he had said when they had last met?
 
“And what would you say to Harry if you knew he was
listening, Romulus?”
“I’d tell him we’re all with him in spirit,” said Lupin,
then hesitated slightly. “And I’d tell him to follow his
instincts, which are good and nearly always right.”
Harry looked at Hermione, whose eyes were full of
tears.
“Nearly always right,” she repeated.
“Oh, didn’t I tell you?” said Ron in surprise. “Bill told
me Lupin’s living with Tonks again! And apparently
she’s getting pretty big too. ...”
“... and our usual update on those friends of Harry
Potter’s who are suffering for their allegiance?” Lee
was saying.
“Well, as regular listeners will know, several of the
more outspoken supporters of Harry Potter have now
been imprisoned, including Xenophilius Lovegood,
erstwhile editor of The Quibbler,” said Lupin.
“At least he’s still alive!” muttered Ron.
“We have also heard within the last few hours that
Rubeus Hagrid” — all three of them gasped, and so
nearly missed the rest of the sentence — “well-known
gamekeeper at Hogwarts School, has narrowly
escaped arrest within the grounds of Hogwarts, where
he is rumored to have hosted a ‘Support Harry Potter’
party in his house. However, Hagrid was not taken
into custody, and is, we believe, on the run.”
“I suppose it helps, when escaping from Death Eaters,
if you’ve got a sixteen-foot-high half brother?” asked
Lee.
 
“It would tend to give you an edge,” agreed Lupin
gravely. “May I just add that while we here at
Potterwatch applaud Hagrid’s spirit, we would urge
even the most devoted of Harry’s supporters against
following Hagrid’s lead. ‘Support Harry Potter’ parties
are unwise in the present climate.”
“Indeed they are, Romulus,” said Lee, “so we suggest
that you continue to show your devotion to the man
with the lightning scar by listening to PotterwatcM
And now let’s move to news concerning the wizard
who is proving just as elusive as Harry Potter. We like
to refer to him as the Chief Death Eater, and here to
give his views on some of the more insane rumors
circulating about him, I’d like to introduce a new
correspondent: Rodent.”
“ ‘Rodent’?” said yet another familiar voice, and Harry,
Ron, and Hermione cried out together:
“Fred!”
“No — is it George?”
“It’s Fred, I think,” said Ron, leaning in closer, as
whichever twin it was said,
“I’m not being ‘Rodent,’ no way, I told you I wanted to
be ‘Rapier’!”
“Oh, all right then. ‘Rapier,’ could you please give us
your take on the various stories we’ve been hearing
about the Chief Death Eater?”
“Yes, River, I can,” said Fred. “As our listeners will
know, unless they’ve taken refuge at the bottom of a
garden pond or somewhere similar, You-Know-Who’s
strategy of remaining in the shadows is creating a
nice little climate of panic. Mind you, if all the alleged
 
sightings of him are genuine, we must have a good
nineteen You-Know-Whos running around the place.”
“Which suits him, of course,” said Kingsley. “The air
of mystery is creating more terror than actually
showing himself.”
“Agreed,” said Fred. “So, people, let’s try and calm
down a bit. Things are bad enough without inventing
stuff as well. For instance, this new idea that You-
Know-Who can kill with a single glance from his eyes.
That’s a basilisk, listeners. One simple test: Check
whether the thing that’s glaring at you has got legs. If
it has, it’s safe to look into its eyes, although if it
really is You-Know-Who, that’s still likely to be the
last thing you ever do.”
For the first time in weeks and weeks, Harry was
laughing: He could feel the weight of tension leaving
him.
“And the rumors that he keeps being sighted abroad?”
asked Lee.
“Well, who wouldn’t want a nice little holiday after all
the hard work he’s been putting in?” asked Fred.
“Point is, people, don’t get lulled into a false sense of
security, thinking he’s out of the country. Maybe he
is, maybe he isn’t, but the fact remains he can move
faster than Severus Snape confronted with shampoo
when he wants to, so don’t count on him being a long
way away if you’re planning on taking any risks. I
never thought I’d hear myself say it, but safety first!”
“Thank you very much for those wise words, Rapier,”
said Lee. “Listeners, that brings us to the end of
another Potterwatch. We don’t know when it will be
possible to broadcast again, but you can be sure we
shall be back. Keep twiddling those dials: The next
 
password will be ‘Mad-Eye.’ Keep each other safe:
Keep faith. Good night.”
The radio’s dial twirled and the lights behind the
tuning panel went out. Harry, Ron, and Hermione
were still beaming. Hearing familiar, friendly voices
was an extraordinary tonic; Harry had become so
used to their isolation he had nearly forgotten that
other people were resisting Voldemort. It was like
waking from a long sleep.
“Good, eh?” said Ron happily.
“Brilliant,” said Harry.
“It’s so brave of them,” sighed Hermione admiringly.
“If they were found ...”
“Well, they keep on the move, don’t they?” said Ron.
“Like us.”
“But did you hear what Fred said?” asked Harry
excitedly; now the broadcast was over, his thoughts
turned again toward his all-consuming obsession.
“He’s abroad! He’s still looking for the Wand, I knew
it!”
“Harry — ”
“Come on, Hermione, why are you so determined not
to admit it? Vol — ”
“HARRY, NO!”
“ — demort’s after the Elder Wand!”
“The name’s Taboo!” Ron bellowed, leaping to his feet
as a loud crack sounded outside the tent. “I told you,
Harry, I told you, we can’t say it anymore — we’ve got
 
to put the protection back around us — quickly — it’s
how they find — ”
But Ron stopped talking, and Harry knew why. The
Sneakoscope on the table had lit up and begun to
spin; they could hear voices coming nearer and
nearer: rough, excited voices. Ron pulled the
Deluminator out of his pocket and clicked it: Their
lamps went out.
“Come out of there with your hands up!” came a
rasping voice through the darkness. “We know you’re
in there! You’ve got half a dozen wands pointing at
you and we don’t care who we curse!”
 
MALFOY MANOR
Harry looked around at the other two, now mere
outlines in the darkness. He saw Hermione point her
wand, not toward the outside, but into his face; there
was a bang, a burst of white light, and he buckled in
agony, unable to see. He could feel his face swelling
rapidly under his hands as heavy footfalls
surrounded him.
“Get up, vermin.”
Unknown hands dragged Harry roughly off the
ground. Before he could stop them, someone had
rummaged through his pockets and removed the
blackthorn wand. Harry clutched at his excruciatingly
painful face, which felt unrecognizable beneath his
fingers, tight, swollen, and puffy as though he had
suffered some violent allergic reaction. His eyes had
been reduced to slits through which he could barely
see; his glasses fell off as he was bundled out of the
tent; all he could make out were the blurred shapes of
four or five people wrestling Ron and Hermione
outside too.
 
“Get — off — her!” Ron shouted. There was the
unmistakable sound of knuckles hitting flesh: Ron
grunted in pain and Hermione screamed, “No! Leave
him alone, leave him alone!”
“Your boyfriend’s going to have worse than that done
to him if he’s on my list,” said the horribly familiar,
rasping voice. “Delicious girl ... What a treat ... I do
enjoy the softness of the skin. ...”
Harry’s stomach turned over. He knew who this was:
Fenrir Grey back, the werewolf who was permitted to
wear Death Eater robes in return for his hired
savagery.
“Search the tent!” said another voice.
Harry was thrown facedown onto the ground. A thud
told him that Ron had been cast down beside him.
They could hear footsteps and crashes; the men were
pushing over chairs inside the tent as they searched.
“Now, let’s see who we’ve got,” said Greyback’s
gloating voice from overhead, and Harry was rolled
over onto his back. A beam of wandlight fell into his
face and Grey back laughed.
“I’ll be needing butterbeer to wash this one down.
What happened to you, ugly?”
Harry did not answer immediately.
“I said,” repeated Greyback, and Harry received a
blow to the diaphragm that made him double over in
pain, “what happened to you?”
“Stung,” Harry muttered. “Been stung.”
“Yeah, looks like it,” said a second voice.
 
“What’s your name?” snarled Greyback.
“Dudley,” said Harry.
“And your first name?”
“I — Vernon. Vernon Dudley.”
“Check the list, Scabior,” said Greyback, and Harry
heard him move sideways to look down at Ron,
instead. “And what about you, ginger?”
“Stan Shunpike,” said Ron.
“Like ’ell you are,” said the man called Scabior. “We
know Stan Shunpike, ’e’s put a bit of work our way.”
There was another thud.
“I’b Bardy,” said Ron, and Harry could tell that his
mouth was full of blood. “Bardy Weadley.”
“A Weasley?” rasped Greyback. “So you’re related to
blood traitors even if you’re not a Mudblood. And
lastly, your pretty little friend ...” The relish in his
voice made Harry’s flesh crawl.
“Easy, Greyback,” said Scabior over the jeering of the
others.
“Oh, I’m not going to bite just yet. We’ll see if she’s a
bit quicker at remembering her name than Barny.
Who are you, girly?”
“Penelope Clearwater,” said Hermione. She sounded
terrified, but convincing.
“What’s your blood status?”
 
“Half-blood,” said Hermione.
“Easy enough to check,” said Scabior. “But the ’ole lot
of ’em look like they could still be ’ogwarts age — ”
“Weh lebt,” said Ron.
“Left, ’ave you, ginger?” said Scabior. “And you
decided to go camping? And you thought, just for a
laugh, you’d use the Dark Lord’s name?”
“Nod a laugh,” said Ron. “Aggiden.”
“Accident?” There was more jeering laughter.
“You know who used to like using the Dark Lord’s
name, Weasley?” growled Greyback. “The Order of the
Phoenix. Mean anything to you?”
“Doh.”
“Well, they don’t show the Dark Lord proper respect,
so the name’s been Tabooed. A few Order members
have been tracked that way. We’ll see. Bind them up
with the other two prisoners!”
Someone yanked Harry up by the hair, dragged him a
short way, pushed him down into a sitting position,
then started binding him back-to-back with other
people. Harry was still half blind, barely able to see
anything through his puffed-up eyes. When at last
the man tying them had walked away, Harry
whispered to the other prisoners.
“Anyone still got a wand?”
“No,” said Ron and Hermione from either side of him.
“This is all my fault. I said the name, I’m sorry — ”
 
“Harry?”
It was a new, but familiar, voice, and it came from
directly behind Harry, from the person tied to
Hermione’s left.
“Dean?”
“It is you! If they find out who they’ve got — ! They’re
Snatchers, they’re only looking for truants to sell for
gold — ”
“Not a bad little haul for one night,” Greyback was
saying, as a pair of hobnailed boots marched close by
Harry and they heard more crashes from inside the
tent. “A Mudblood, a runaway goblin, and three
truants. You checked their names on the list yet,
Scabior?” he roared.
“Yeah. There’s no Vernon Dudley on ’ere, Greyback.”
“Interesting,” said Greyback. “That’s interesting.”
He crouched down beside Harry, who saw, through
the infinitesimal gap left between his swollen eyelids,
a face covered in matted gray hair and whiskers, with
pointed brown teeth and sores at the corners of his
mouth. Greyback smelled as he had done at the top of
the tower where Dumbledore had died: of dirt, sweat,
and blood.
“So you aren’t wanted, then, Vernon? Or are you on
that list under a different name? What House were
you in at Hogwarts?”
“Slytherin,” said Harry automatically.
 
“Funny ’ow they all thinks we wants to ’ear that,”
jeered Scabior out of the shadows. “But none of ’em
can tell us where the common room is.”
“It’s in the dungeons,” said Harry clearly. “You enter
through the wall. It’s full of skulls and stuff and it’s
under the lake, so the light’s all green.”
There was a short pause.
“Well, well, looks like we really ’ave caught a little
Slytherin,” said Scabior. “Good for you, Vernon,
’cause there ain’t a lot of Mudblood Slytherins. Who’s
your father?”
“He works at the Ministry,” Harry lied. He knew that
his whole story would collapse with the smallest
investigation, but on the other hand, he only had
until his face regained its usual appearance before
the game was up in any case. “Department of Magical
Accidents and Catastrophes.”
“You know what, Greyback,” said Scabior. “I think
there is a Dudley in there.”
Harry could barely breathe: Could luck, sheer luck,
get them safely out of this?
“Well, well,” said Greyback, and Harry could hear the
tiniest note of trepidation in that callous voice, and
knew that Greyback was wondering whether he had
indeed just attacked and bound the son of a Ministry
official. Harry’s heart was pounding against the ropes
around his ribs; he would not have been surprised to
know that Greyback could see it. “If you’re telling the
truth, ugly, you’ve got nothing to fear from a trip to
the Ministry. I expect your father’ll reward us just for
picking you up.”
 
“But,” said Harry, his mouth bone dry, “if you just let
us — ”
“Hey!” came a shout from inside the tent. “Look at
this, Greyback!”
A dark figure came bustling toward them, and Harry
saw a glint of silver in the light of their wands. They
had found Gryffindor’s sword.
“Ve-e-ry nice,” said Greyback appreciatively, taking it
from his companion. “Oh, very nice indeed. Looks
goblin-made, that. Where did you get something like
this?”
“It’s my father’s,” Harry lied, hoping against hope that
it was too dark for Greyback to see the name etched
just below the hilt. “We borrowed it to cut firewood — ”
“ ’ang on a minute, Greyback! Look at this, in the
Propheti”
As Scabior said it, Harry’s scar, which was stretched
tight across his distended forehead, burned savagely.
More clearly than he could make out anything around
him, he saw a towering building, a grim fortress, jet-
black and forbidding; Voldemort’s thoughts had
suddenly become razor-sharp again; he was gliding
toward the gigantic building with a sense of calmly
euphoric purpose. ...
So close ...So close . . .
With a huge effort of will Harry closed his mind to
Voldemort’s thoughts, pulling himself back to where
he sat, tied to Ron, Hermione, Dean, and Griphook in
the darkness, listening to Greyback and Scabior.
 
“ ‘’ermione Granger,’ ” Scabior was saying, “ ‘the
Mudblood who is known to be traveling with ’arry
Potter.’ ”
Harry’s scar burned in the silence, but he made a
supreme effort to keep himself present, not to slip
into Voldemort’s mind. He heard the creak of
Greyback’s boots as he crouched down in front of
Hermione.
“You know what, little girly? This picture looks a hell
of a lot like you.”
“It isn’t! It isn’t me!”
Hermione ’s terrified squeak was as good as a
confession.
“ ‘... known to be traveling with Harry Potter,’ ”
repeated Grey back quietly.
A stillness had settled over the scene. Harry’s scar
was exquisitely painful, but he struggled with all his
strength against the pull of Voldemort’s thoughts: It
had never been so important to remain in his own
right mind.
“Well, this changes things, doesn’t it?” whispered
Greyback. Nobody spoke: Harry sensed the gang of
Snatchers watching, frozen, and felt Hermione ’s arm
trembling against his. Greyback got up and took a
couple of steps to where Harry sat, crouching down
again to stare closely at his misshapen features.
“What’s that on your forehead, Vernon?” he asked
softly, his breath foul in Harry’s nostrils as he
pressed a filthy finger to the taut scar.
 
“Don’t touch it!” Harry yelled; he could not stop
himself; he thought he might be sick from the pain of
it.
“I thought you wore glasses, Potter?” breathed
Greyback.
“I found glasses!” yelped one of the Snatchers
skulking in the background. “There was glasses in the
tent, Greyback, wait — ”
And seconds later Harry’s glasses had been rammed
back onto his face. The Snatchers were closing in
now, peering at him.
“It is!” rasped Greyback. “We’ve caught Potter!”
They all took several steps backward, stunned by
what they had done. Harry, still fighting to remain
present inside his own splitting head, could think of
nothing to say: Fragmented visions were breaking
across the surface of his mind —
— He was gliding around the high walls of the black
fortress —
No, he was Harry, tied up and wandless, in grave
danger —
— looking up, up to the topmost window, the highest
tower —
He was Harry, and they were discussing his fate in
low voices —
— Time to fly ...
“...to the Ministry?”
 
“To hell with the Ministry,” growled Greyback. “They’ll
take the credit, and we won’t get a look in. I say we
take him straight to You-Know-Who.”
“Will you summon ’im? ’ere?” said Scabior, sounding
awed, terrified.
“No,” snarled Greyback, “I haven’t got — they say he’s
using the Malfoys’ place as a base. We’ll take the boy
there.”
Harry thought he knew why Greyback was not calling
Voldemort. The werewolf might be allowed to wear
Death Eater robes when they wanted to use him, but
only Voldemort’s inner circle were branded with the
Dark Mark: Greyback had not been granted this
highest honor.
Harry’s scar seared again —
— and he rose into the night, flying straight up to the
window at the very top of the tower —
"... completely sure it’s him? ’Cause if it ain’t,
Greyback, we’re dead.”
“Who’s in charge here?” roared Greyback, covering his
moment of inadequacy. “I say that’s Potter, and him
plus his wand, that’s two hundred thousand Galleons
right there! But if you’re too gutless to come along,
any of you, it’s all for me, and with any luck, I’ll get
the girl thrown in!”
— The window was the merest slit in the black rock,
not big enough for a man to enter. ...A skeletal figure
was just visible through it, curled beneath a blanket. . . .
Dead, or sleeping ... ?
 
“All right!” said Scabior. “All right, we’re in! And what
about the rest of ’em, Greyback, what’ll we do with
’em?
“Might as well take the lot. We’ve got two Mudbloods,
that’s another ten Galleons. Give me the sword as
well. If they’re rubies, that’s another small fortune
right there.”
The prisoners were dragged to their feet. Harry could
hear Hermione’s breathing, fast and terrified.
“Grab hold and make it tight. I’ll do Potter!” said
Greyback, seizing a fistful of Harry’s hair; Harry could
feel his long yellow nails scratching his scalp. “On
three! One — two — three — ”
They Disapparated, pulling the prisoners with them.
Harry struggled, trying to throw off Greyback’s hand,
but it was hopeless: Ron and Hermione were
squeezed tightly against him on either side, he could
not separate from the group, and as the breath was
squeezed out of him his scar seared more painfully
still —
— as he forced himself through the slit of a window
like a snake and landed, lightly as vapor, inside the
cell-like room —
The prisoners lurched into one another as they
landed in a country lane. Harry’s eyes, still puffy, took
a moment to acclimatize, then he saw a pair of
wrought-iron gates at the foot of what looked like a
long drive. He experienced the tiniest trickle of relief.
The worst had not happened yet: Voldemort was not
here. He was, Harry knew, for he was fighting to
resist the vision, in some strange, fortresslike place,
at the top of a tower. How long it would take
 
Voldemort to get to this place, once he knew that
Harry was here, was another matter. ...
One of the Snatchers strode to the gates and shook
them.
“How do we get in? They’re locked, Greyback, I can’t
— blimey!”
He whipped his hands away in fright. The iron was
contorting, twisting itself out of the abstract furls and
coils into a frightening face, which spoke in a
clanging, echoing voice: “State your purpose!”
“We’ve got Potter!” Greyback roared triumphantly.
“We’ve captured Harry Potter!”
The gates swung open.
“Come on!” said Greyback to his men, and the
prisoners were shunted through the gates and up the
drive, between high hedges that muffled their
footsteps. Harry saw a ghostly white shape above
him, and realized it was an albino peacock. He
stumbled and was dragged onto his feet by Greyback;
now he was staggering along sideways, tied back-to-
back to the four other prisoners. Closing his puffy
eyes, he allowed the pain in his scar to overcome him
for a moment, wanting to know what Voldemort was
doing, whether he knew yet that Harry was caught. ...
The emaciated figure stirred beneath its thin blanket
and rolled over toward him, eyes opening in a skull of
a face. ... The frail man sat up, great sunken eyes
fixed upon him, upon Voldemort, and then he smiled.
Most of his teeth were gone. ...
“So, you have come. I thought you would ... one day.
But your journey was pointless. I never had it.”
 
“ You lie]”
As Voldemort’s anger throbbed inside him, Harry’s
scar threatened to burst with pain, and he wrenched
his mind back to his own body, fighting to remain
present as the prisoners were pushed over gravel.
Light spilled out over all of them.
“What is this?” said a woman’s cold voice.
“We’re here to see He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!”
rasped Greyback.
“Who are you?”
“You know me!” There was resentment in the
werewolf’s voice. “Fenrir Greyback! We’ve caught
Harry Potter!”
Greyback seized Harry and dragged him around to
face the light, forcing the other prisoners to shuffle
around too.
“I know ’e’s swollen, ma’am, but it’s ’im!” piped up
Scabior. “If you look a bit closer, you’ll see ’is scar.
And this ’ere, see the girl? The Mudblood who’s been
traveling around with ’im, ma’am. There’s no doubt
it’s ’im, and we’ve got ’is wand as well! ’Ere, ma’am — ”
Through his puffy eyelids Harry saw Narcissa Malfoy
scrutinizing his swollen face. Scabior thrust the
blackthorn wand at her. She raised her eyebrows.
“Bring them in,” she said.
Harry and the others were shoved and kicked up
broad stone steps into a hallway lined with portraits.
 
“Follow me,” said Narcissa, leading the way across the
hall. “My son, Draco, is home for his Easter holidays.
If that is Harry Potter, he will know.”
The drawing room dazzled after the darkness outside;
even with his eyes almost closed Harry could make
out the wide proportions of the room. A crystal
chandelier hung from the ceiling, more portraits
against the dark purple walls. Two figures rose from
chairs in front of an ornate marble fireplace as the
prisoners were forced into the room by the Snatchers.
“What is this?”
The dreadfully familiar, drawling voice of Lucius
Malfoy fell on Harry’s ears. He was panicking now: He
could see no way out, and it was easier, as his fear
mounted, to block out Voldemort’s thoughts, though
his scar was still burning.
“They say they’ve got Potter,” said Narcissa’s cold
voice. “Draco, come here.”
Harry did not dare look directly at Draco, but saw
him obliquely: a figure slightly taller than he was,
rising from an armchair, his face a pale and pointed
blur beneath white-blond hair.
Greyback forced the prisoners to turn again so as to
place Harry directly beneath the chandelier.
“Well, boy?” rasped the werewolf.
Harry was facing a mirror over the fireplace, a great
gilded thing in an intricately scrolled frame. Through
the slits of his eyes he saw his own reflection for the
first time since leaving Grimmauld Place.
 
His face was huge, shiny, and pink, every feature
distorted by Hermione’s jinx. His black hair reached
his shoulders and there was a dark shadow around
his jaw. Had he not known that it was he who stood
there, he would have wondered who was wearing his
glasses. He resolved not to speak, for his voice was
sure to give him away; yet he still avoided eye contact
with Draco as the latter approached.
“Well, Draco?” said Lucius Malfoy. He sounded avid.
“Is it? Is it Harry Potter?”
“I can’t — I can’t be sure,” said Draco. He was keeping
his distance from Greyback, and seemed as scared of
looking at Harry as Harry was of looking at him.
“But look at him carefully, look! Come closer!”
Harry had never heard Lucius Malfoy so excited.
“Draco, if we are the ones who hand Potter over to the
Dark Lord, everything will be forgiv — ”
“Now, we won’t be forgetting who actually caught him,
I hope, Mr. Malfoy?” said Greyback menacingly.
“Of course not, of course not!” said Lucius
impatiently. He approached Harry himself, came so
close that Harry could see the usually languid, pale
face in sharp detail even through his swollen eyes.
With his face a puffy mask, Harry felt as though he
was peering out from between the bars of a cage.
“What did you do to him?” Lucius asked Greyback.
“How did he get into this state?”
“That wasn’t us.”
“Looks more like a Stinging Jinx to me,” said Lucius.
 
His gray eyes raked Harry’s forehead.
“There’s something there,” he whispered, “it could be
the scar, stretched tight. ... Draco, come here, look
properly! What do you think?”
Harry saw Draco’s face up close now, right beside his
father’s. They were extraordinarily alike, except that
while his father looked beside himself with
excitement, Draco’s expression was full of reluctance,
even fear.
“I don’t know,” he said, and he walked away toward
the fireplace where his mother stood watching.
“We had better be certain, Lucius,” Narcissa called to
her husband in her cold, clear voice. “Completely sure
that it is Potter, before we summon the Dark Lord . . .
They say this is his” — she was looking closely at the
blackthorn wand — “but it does not resemble
Ollivander’s description. ... If we are mistaken, if we
call the Dark Lord here for nothing . . . Remember
what he did to Rowle and Dolohov?”
“What about the Mudblood, then?” growled Greyback.
Harry was nearly thrown off his feet as the Snatchers
forced the prisoners to swivel around again, so that
the light fell on Hermione instead.
“Wait,” said Narcissa sharply. “Yes — yes, she was in
Madam Malkin’s with Potter! I saw her picture in the
Prophett Look, Draco, isn’t it the Granger girl?”
“I ... maybe ... yeah.”
“But then, that’s the Weasley boy!” shouted Lucius,
striding around the bound prisoners to face Ron. “It’s
them, Potter’s friends — Draco, look at him, isn’t it
Arthur Weasley’s son, what’s his name — ?”
 
“Yeah,” said Draco again, his back to the prisoners.
“It could be.”
The drawing room door opened behind Harry. A
woman spoke, and the sound of the voice wound
Harry’s fear to an even higher pitch.
“What is this? What’s happened, Cissy?”
Bellatrix Lestrange walked slowly around the
prisoners, and stopped on Harry’s right, staring at
Hermione through her heavily lidded eyes.
“But surely,” she said quietly, “this is the Mudblood
girl? This is Granger?”
“Yes, yes, it’s Granger!” cried Lucius. “And beside her,
we think, Potter! Potter and his friends, caught at
last!”
“Potter?” shrieked Bellatrix, and she backed away, the
better to take in Harry. “Are you sure? Well then, the
Dark Lord must be informed at once!”
She dragged back her left sleeve: Harry saw the Dark
Mark burned into the flesh of her arm, and knew that
she was about to touch it, to summon her beloved
master —
“I was about to call him!” said Lucius, and his hand
actually closed upon Bellatrix’s wrist, preventing her
from touching the Mark. “I shall summon him, Bella,
Potter has been brought to my house, and it is
therefore upon my authority — ”
“Your authority!” she sneered, attempting to wrench
her hand from his grasp. “You lost your authority
when you lost your wand, Lucius! How dare you! Take
your hands off me!”
 
“This is nothing to do with you, you did not capture
the boy — ”
“Begging your pardon, Mr. Malfoy,” interjected
Greyback, “but it’s us that caught Potter, and it’s us
that 11 be claiming the gold — ”
“Gold!” laughed Bellatrix, still attempting to throw off
her brother-in-law, her free hand groping in her
pocket for her wand. “Take your gold, filthy
scavenger, what do I want with gold? I seek only the
honor of his — of — ”
She stopped struggling, her dark eyes fixed upon
something Harry could not see. Jubilant at her
capitulation, Lucius threw her hand from him and
ripped up his own sleeve —
“STOP!” shrieked Bellatrix. “Do not touch it, we shall
all perish if the Dark Lord comes now!”
Lucius froze, his index finger hovering over his own
Mark. Bellatrix strode out of Harry’s limited line of
vision.
“What is that?” he heard her say.
“Sword,” grunted an out-of-sight Snatcher.
“Give it to me.”
“It’s not yorn, missus, it’s mine, I reckon I found it.”
There was a bang and a flash of red light: Harry knew
that the Snatcher had been Stunned. There was a
roar of anger from his fellows: Scabior drew his wand.
“What d’you think you’re playing at, woman?”
 
“Stupefyl” she screamed. “Stupefyl”
They were no match for her, even though there were
four of them against one of her: She was a witch, as
Harry knew, with prodigious skill and no conscience.
They fell where they stood, all except Greyback, who
had been forced into a kneeling position, his arms
outstretched. Out of the corners of his eyes Harry saw
Bellatrix bearing down upon the werewolf, the sword
of Gryffindor gripped tightly in her hand, her face
waxen.
“Where did you get this sword?” she whispered to
Greyback as she pulled his wand out of his
unresisting grip.
“How dare you?” he snarled, his mouth the only thing
that could move as he was forced to gaze up at her.
He bared his pointed teeth. “Release me, woman!”
“Where did you find this sword?” she repeated,
brandishing it in his face. “Snape sent it to my vault
in Gringotts!”
“It was in their tent,” rasped Greyback. “Release me, I
say!”
She waved her wand, and the werewolf sprang to his
feet, but appeared too wary to approach her. He
prowled behind an armchair, his filthy curved nails
clutching its back.
“Draco, move this scum outside,” said Bellatrix,
indicating the unconscious men. “If you haven’t got
the guts to finish them, then leave them in the
courtyard for me.”
“Don’t you dare speak to Draco like — ” said Narcissa
furiously, but Bellatrix screamed,
 
“Be quiet! The situation is graver than you can
possibly imagine, Cissy! We have a very serious
problem!”
She stood, panting slightly, looking down at the
sword, examining its hilt. Then she turned to look at
the silent prisoners.
“If it is indeed Potter, he must not be harmed,” she
muttered, more to herself than to the others. “The
Dark Lord wishes to dispose of Potter himself. . . . But
if he finds out ... I must ... I must know. ...”
She turned back to her sister again.
“The prisoners must be placed in the cellar, while I
think what to do!”
“This is my house, Bella, you don’t give orders in my
“Do it! You have no idea of the danger we are in!”
shrieked Bellatrix. She looked frightening, mad; a
thin stream of fire issued from her wand and burned
a hole in the carpet.
Narcissa hesitated for a moment, then addressed the
werewolf.
“Take these prisoners down to the cellar, Greyback.”
“Wait,” said Bellatrix sharply. “All except ... except for
the Mudblood.”
Greyback gave a grunt of pleasure.
“No!” shouted Ron. “You can have me, keep me!”
 
Bellatrix hit him across the face; the blow echoed
around the room.
“If she dies under questioning, I’ll take you next,” she
said. “Blood traitor is next to Mudblood in my book.
Take them downstairs, Greyback, and make sure they
are secure, but do nothing more to them — yet.”
She threw Greyback’s wand back to him, then took a
short silver knife from under her robes. She cut
Hermione free from the other prisoners, then dragged
her by the hair into the middle of the room, while
Greyback forced the rest of them to shuffle across to
another door, into a dark passageway, his wand held
out in front of him, projecting an invisible and
irresistible force.
“Reckon she’ll let me have a bit of the girl when she’s
finished with her?” Greyback crooned as he forced
them along the corridor. “I’d say I’ll get a bite or two,
wouldn’t you, ginger?”
Harry could feel Ron shaking. They were forced down
a steep flight of stairs, still tied back-to-back and in
danger of slipping and breaking their necks at any
moment. At the bottom was a heavy door. Greyback
unlocked it with a tap of his wand, then forced them
into a dank and musty room and left them in total
darkness. The echoing bang of the slammed cellar
door had not died away before there was a terrible,
drawn-out scream from directly above them.
“HERMIONE!” Ron bellowed, and he started to writhe
and struggle against the ropes tying them together, so
that Harry staggered. “HERMIONE!”
“Be quiet!” Harry said. “Shut up, Ron, we need to
work out a way — ”
 
“HERMIONE! HERMIONE!”
“We need a plan, stop yelling — we need to get these
ropes off — ”
“Harry?” came a whisper through the darkness. “Ron?
Is that you?”
Ron stopped shouting. There was a sound of
movement close by them, then Harry saw a shadow
moving closer.
“Harry? Ron?”
“Luna?”
“Yes, it’s me! Oh no, I didn’t want you to be caught!”
“Luna, can you help us get these ropes off?” said
Harry.
“Oh yes, I expect so. ... There’s an old nail we use if
we need to break anything. ... Just a moment ...”
Hermione screamed again from overhead, and they
could hear Bellatrix screaming too, but her words
were inaudible, for Ron shouted again, “HERMIONE!
HERMIONE!”
“Mr. Ollivander?” Harry could hear Luna saying. “Mr.
Ollivander, have you got the nail? If you just move
over a little bit... I think it was beside the water jug.
She was back within seconds.
“You’ll need to stay still,” she said.
 
Harry could feel her digging at the rope’s tough fibers
to work the knots free. From upstairs they heard
Bellatrix’s voice.
“I’m going to ask you again! Where did you get this
sword? Where?”
“We found it — we found it — PLEASE!” Hermione
screamed again; Ron struggled harder than ever, and
the rusty nail slipped onto Harry’s wrist.
“Ron, please stay still!” Luna whispered. “I can’t see
what I’m doing — ”
“My pocket!” said Ron. “In my pocket, there’s a
Deluminator, and it’s full of light!”
A few seconds later, there was a click, and the
luminescent spheres the Deluminator had sucked
from the lamps in the tent flew into the cellar: Unable
to rejoin their sources, they simply hung there, like
tiny suns, flooding the underground room with light.
Harry saw Luna, all eyes in her white face, and the
motionless figure of Ollivander the wandmaker,
curled up on the floor in the corner. Craning around,
he caught sight of their fellow prisoners: Dean and
Griphook the goblin, who seemed barely conscious,
kept standing by the ropes that bound him to the
humans.
“Oh, that’s much easier, thanks, Ron,” said Luna,
and she began hacking at their bindings again.
“Hello, Dean!”
From above came Bellatrix’s voice.
“You are lying, filthy Mudblood, and I know it! You
have been inside my vault at Gringotts! Tell the truth,
tell the truth\”
 
Another terrible scream
“HERMIONE!”
“What else did you take? What else have you got? Tell
me the truth or, I swear, I shall run you through with
this knife!”
“There!”
Harry felt the ropes fall away and turned, rubbing his
wrists, to see Ron running around the cellar, looking
up at the low ceiling, searching for a trapdoor. Dean,
his face bruised and bloody, said “Thanks” to Luna
and stood there, shivering, but Griphook sank onto
the cellar floor, looking groggy and disoriented, many
welts across his swarthy face.
Ron was now trying to Disapparate without a wand.
“There’s no way out, Ron,” said Luna, watching his
fruitless efforts. “The cellar is completely escape-
proof. I tried, at first. Mr. Ollivander has been here for
a long time, he’s tried everything.”
Hermione was screaming again: The sound went
through Harry like physical pain. Barely conscious of
the fierce prickling of his scar, he too started to run
around the cellar, feeling the walls for he hardly knew
what, knowing in his heart that it was useless.
“What else did you take, what else? ANSWER ME!
CRUCIO\”
Hermione ’s screams echoed off the walls upstairs,
Ron was half sobbing as he pounded the walls with
his fists, and Harry in utter desperation seized
Hagrid’s pouch from around his neck and groped
inside it: He pulled out Dumbledore’s Snitch and
 
shook it, hoping for he did not know what — nothing
happened — he waved the broken halves of the
phoenix wand, but they were lifeless — the mirror
fragment fell sparkling to the floor, and he saw a
gleam of brightest blue —
Dumbledore’s eye was gazing at him out of the mirror.
“Help us!” he yelled at it in mad desperation. “We’re in
the cellar of Malfoy Manor, help us!”
The eye blinked and was gone.
Harry was not even sure that it had really been there.
He tilted the shard of mirror this way and that, and
saw nothing reflected there but the walls and ceiling
of their prison, and upstairs Hermione was screaming
worse than ever, and next to him Ron was bellowing,
“HERMIONE! HERMIONE!”
“How did you get into my vault?” they heard Bellatrix
scream. “Did that dirty little goblin in the cellar help
you?”
“We only met him tonight!” Hermione sobbed. “We’ve
never been inside your vault. ... It isn’t the real sword!
It’s a copy, just a copy!
“A copy?” screeched Bellatrix. “Oh, a likely story!”
“But we can find out easily!” came Lucius’s voice.
“Draco, fetch the goblin, he can tell us whether the
sword is real or not!”
Harry dashed across the cellar to where Griphook was
huddled on the floor.
 
“Griphook,” he whispered into the goblin’s pointed
ear, “you must tell them that sword’s a fake, they
mustn’t know it’s the real one, Griphook, please — ”
He could hear someone scuttling down the cellar
steps; next moment, Draco’s shaking voice spoke
from behind the door.
“Stand back. Line up against the back wall. Don’t try
anything, or I’ll kill you!”
They did as they were bidden; as the lock turned, Ron
clicked the Deluminator and the lights whisked back
into his pocket, restoring the cellar’s darkness. The
door flew open; Malfoy marched inside, wand held out
in front of him, pale and determined. He seized the
little goblin by the arm and backed out again,
dragging Griphook with him. The door slammed shut
and at the same moment a loud crack echoed inside
the cellar.
Ron clicked the Deluminator. Three balls of light flew
back into the air from his pocket, revealing Dobby the
house-elf, who had just Apparated into their midst.
“DOB — !”
Harry hit Ron on the arm to stop him shouting, and
Ron looked terrified at his mistake. Footsteps crossed
the ceiling overhead: Draco marching Griphook to
Bellatrix.
Dobby’s enormous, tennis-ball-shaped eyes were
wide; he was trembling from his feet to the tips of his
ears. He was back in the home of his old masters, and
it was clear that he was petrified.
“Harry Potter,” he squeaked in the tiniest quiver of a
voice, “Dobby has come to rescue you.”
 
“But how did you — ?”
An awful scream drowned Harry’s words: Hermione
was being tortured again. He cut to the essentials.
“You can Disapparate out of this cellar?” he asked
Dobby, who nodded, his ears flapping.
“And you can take humans with you?”
Dobby nodded again.
“Right. Dobby, I want you to grab Luna, Dean, and
Mr. Ollivander, and take them — take them to — ”
“Bill and Fleur’s,” said Ron. “Shell Cottage on the
outskirts of Tinworth!”
The elf nodded for a third time.
“And then come back,” said Harry. “Can you do that,
Dobby?”
“Of course, Harry Potter,” whispered the little elf. He
hurried over to Mr. Ollivander, who appeared to be
barely conscious. He took one of the wandmaker’s
hands in his own, then held out the other to Luna
and Dean, neither of whom moved.
“Harry, we want to help you!” Luna whispered.
“We can’t leave you here,” said Dean.
“Go, both of you! We’ll see you at Bill and Fleur’s.”
As Harry spoke, his scar burned worse than ever, and
for a few seconds he looked down, not upon the
wandmaker, but on another man who was just as old,
just as thin, but laughing scornfully.
 
“ Kill me, then, Voldemort, I welcome death! But my
death will not bring you what you seek. . . . There is so
much you do not understand. ...”
He felt Voldemort’s fury, but as Hermione screamed
again he shut it out, returning to the cellar and the
horror of his own present.
“Go!” Harry beseeched Luna and Dean. “Go! Well
follow, just go!”
They caught hold of the elf’s outstretched fingers.
There was another loud crack, and Dobby, Luna,
Dean, and Ollivander vanished.
“What was that?” shouted Lucius Malfoy from over
their heads. “Did you hear that? What was that noise
in the cellar?”
Harry and Ron stared at each other.
“Draco — no, call Wormtail! Make him go and check!”
Footsteps crossed the room overhead, then there was
silence. Harry knew that the people in the drawing
room were listening for more noises from the cellar.
“We’re going to have to try and tackle him,” he
whispered to Ron. They had no choice: The moment
anyone entered the room and saw the absence of
three prisoners, they were lost. “Leave the lights on,”
Harry added, and as they heard someone descending
the steps outside the door, they backed against the
wall on either side of it.
“Stand back,” came Wormtail’s voice. “Stand away
from the door. I am coming in.”
 
The door flew open. For a split second Wormtail gazed
into the apparently empty cellar, ablaze with light
from the three miniature suns floating in midair.
Then Harry and Ron launched themselves upon him.
Ron seized Wormtail’s wand arm and forced it
upward; Harry slapped a hand to his mouth, muffling
his voice. Silently they struggled: Wormtail’s wand
emitted sparks; his silver hand closed around Harry’s
throat.
“What is it, Wormtail?” called Lucius Malfoy from
above.
“Nothing!” Ron called back, in a passable imitation of
Wormtail’s wheezy voice. “All fine!”
Harry could barely breathe.
“You’re going to kill me?” Harry choked, attempting to
prise off the metal fingers. “After I saved your life?
You owe me, Wormtail!”
The silver fingers slackened. Harry had not expected
it: He wrenched himself free, astonished, keeping his
hand over Wormtail’s mouth. He saw the ratlike
man’s small watery eyes widen with fear and surprise:
He seemed just as shocked as Harry at what his hand
had done, at the tiny, merciful impulse it had
betrayed, and he continued to struggle more
powerfully, as though to undo that moment of
weakness.
“And well have that,” whispered Ron, tugging
Wormtail’s wand from his other hand.
Wandless, helpless, Pettigrew’s pupils dilated in
terror. His eyes had slid from Harry’s face to
something else. His own silver fingers were moving
inexorably toward his own throat.
 
“No — ”
Without pausing to think, Harry tried to drag back
the hand, but there was no stopping it. The silver tool
that Voldemort had given his most cowardly servant
had turned upon its disarmed and useless owner;
Pettigrew was reaping his reward for his hesitation,
his moment of pity; he was being strangled before
their eyes.
“No!”
Ron had released Wormtail too, and together he and
Harry tried to pull the crushing metal fingers from
around Wormtail’s throat, but it was no use.
Pettigrew was turning blue.
“Relashiol” said Ron, pointing the wand at the silver
hand, but nothing happened; Pettigrew dropped to his
knees, and at the same moment, Hermione gave a
dreadful scream from overhead. Wormtail’s eyes rolled
upward in his purple face; he gave a last twitch, and
was still.
Harry and Ron looked at each other, then leaving
Wormtail’s body on the floor behind them, ran up the
stairs and back into the shadowy passageway leading
to the drawing room. Cautiously they crept along it
until they reached the drawing room door, which was
ajar. Now they had a clear view of Bellatrix looking
down at Griphook, who was holding Gryffindor’s
sword in his long-fingered hands. Hermione was lying
at Bellatrix’s feet. She was barely stirring.
“Well?” Bellatrix said to Griphook. “Is it the true
sword?”
Harry waited, holding his breath, fighting against the
prickling of his scar.
 
“No,” said Griphook. “It is a fake.”
“Are you sure?” panted Bellatrix. “Quite sure?”
“Yes,” said the goblin.
Relief broke across her face, all tension drained from
it.
“Good,” she said, and with a casual flick of her wand
she slashed another deep cut into the goblin’s face,
and he dropped with a yell at her feet. She kicked him
aside. “And now,” she said in a voice that burst with
triumph, “we call the Dark Lord!”
And she pushed back her sleeve and touched her
forefinger to the Dark Mark.
At once, Harry’s scar felt as though it had split open
again. His true surroundings vanished: He was
Voldemort, and the skeletal wizard before him was
laughing toothlessly at him; he was enraged at the
summons he felt — he had warned them, he had told
them to summon him for nothing less than Potter. If
they were mistaken . . .
“Kill me, then!” demanded the old man. “You will not
win, you cannot win! That wand will never, ever be
yours — ”
And Voldemort’s fury broke: A burst of green light
filled the prison room and the frail old body was lifted
from its hard bed and then fell back, lifeless, and
Voldemort returned to the window, his wrath barely
controllable. ... They would suffer his retribution if
they had no good reason for calling him back. . . .
“And I think,” said Bellatrix’s voice, “we can dispose of
the Mudblood. Greyback, take her if you want her.”
 
“NOOOOOOOOOOOO!”
Ron had burst into the drawing room; Bellatrix looked
around, shocked; she turned her wand to face Ron
instead —
“ ExpelliarmusV’ he roared, pointing Wormtail’s wand
at Bellatrix, and hers flew into the air and was caught
by Harry, who had sprinted after Ron. Lucius,
Narcissa, Draco, and Greyback wheeled about; Harry
yelled, “Stupefy\” and Lucius Malfoy collapsed onto
the hearth. Jets of light flew from Draco’s, Narcissa’s,
and Greyback’s wands; Harry threw himself to the
floor, rolling behind a sofa to avoid them.
“STOP OR SHE DIES!”
Panting, Harry peered around the edge of the sofa.
Bellatrix was supporting Hermione, who seemed to be
unconscious, and was holding her short silver knife
to Hermione ’s throat.
“Drop your wands,” she whispered. “Drop them, or
we’ll see exactly how filthy her blood is!”
Ron stood rigid, clutching Wormtail’s wand. Harry
straightened up, still holding Bellatrix’s.
“I said, drop them!” she screeched, pressing the blade
into Hermione’s throat: Harry saw beads of blood
appear there.
“All right!” he shouted, and he dropped Bellatrix’s
wand onto the floor at his feet. Ron did the same with
Wormtail’s. Both raised their hands to shoulder
height.
“Good!” she leered. “Draco, pick them up! The Dark
Lord is coming, Harry Potter! Your death approaches!”
 
Harry knew it; his scar was bursting with the pain of
it, and he could feel Voldemort flying through the sky
from far away, over a dark and stormy sea, and soon
he would be close enough to Apparate to them, and
Harry could see no way out.
“Now,” said Bellatrix softly, as Draco hurried back to
her with the wands, “Cissy, I think we ought to tie
these little heroes up again, while Greyback takes
care of Miss Mudblood. I am sure the Dark Lord will
not begrudge you the girl, Greyback, after what you
have done tonight.”
At the last word there was a peculiar grinding noise
from above. All of them looked upward in time to see
the crystal chandelier tremble; then, with a creak and
an ominous jingling, it began to fall. Bellatrix was
directly beneath it; dropping Hermione, she threw
herself aside with a scream. The chandelier crashed
to the floor in an explosion of crystal and chains,
falling on top of Hermione and the goblin, who still
clutched the sword of Gryffindor. Glittering shards of
crystal flew in all directions: Draco doubled over, his
hands covering his bloody face.
As Ron ran to pull Hermione out of the wreckage,
Harry took his chance: He leapt over an armchair and
wrested the three wands from Draco’s grip, pointed all
of them at Greyback, and yelled, “Stupefyl” The
werewolf was lifted off his feet by the triple spell, flew
up to the ceiling, and then smashed to the ground.
As Narcissa dragged Draco out of the way of further
harm, Bellatrix sprang to her feet, her hair flying as
she brandished the silver knife; but Narcissa had
directed her wand at the doorway.
“Dobby!” she screamed, and even Bellatrix froze.
“You! You dropped the chandelier — ?”
 
The tiny elf trotted into the room, his shaking finger
pointing at his old mistress.
“You must not hurt Harry Potter,” he squeaked.
“Kill him, Cissy!” shrieked Bellatrix, but there was
another loud crack, and Narcissa’s wand too flew into
the air and landed on the other side of the room.
“You dirty little monkey!” bawled Bellatrix. “How dare
you take a witch’s wand, how dare you defy your
masters?”
“Dobby has no master!” squealed the elf. “Dobby is a
free elf, and Dobby has come to save Harry Potter and
his friends!”
Harry’s scar was blinding him with pain. Dimly he
knew that they had moments, seconds before
Voldemort was with them.
“Ron, catch — and GO!” he yelled, throwing one of the
wands to him; then he bent down to tug Griphook out
from under the chandelier. Hoisting the groaning
goblin, who still clung to the sword, over one
shoulder, Harry seized Dobby’s hand and spun on the
spot to Disapparate.
As he turned into darkness he caught one last view of
the drawing room: of the pale, frozen figures of
Narcissa and Draco, of the streak of red that was
Ron’s hair, and a blur of flying silver, as Bellatrix’s
knife flew across the room at the place where he was
vanishing —
Bill and Fleur’s . . . Shell Cottage . . . Bill and Fleur’s . . .
He had disappeared into the unknown; all he could
do was repeat the name of the destination and hope
 
that it would suffice to take him there. The pain in his
forehead pierced him, and the weight of the goblin
bore down upon him; he could feel the blade of
Gryffindor’s sword bumping against his back; Dobby’s
hand jerked in his; he wondered whether the elf was
trying to take charge, to pull them in the right
direction, and tried, by squeezing the fingers, to
indicate that that was fine with him. ...
And then they hit solid earth and smelled salty air.
Harry fell to his knees, relinquished Dobby’s hand,
and attempted to lower Griphook gently to the
ground.
“Are you all right?” he said as the goblin stirred, but
Griphook merely whimpered.
Harry squinted around through the darkness. There
seemed to be a cottage a short way away under the
wide starry sky, and he thought he saw movement
outside it.
“Dobby, is this Shell Cottage?” he whispered,
clutching the two wands he had brought from the
Malfoys’, ready to fight if he needed to. “Have we come
to the right place? Dobby?”
He looked around. The little elf stood feet from him.
“DOBBY!”
The elf swayed slightly, stars reflected in his wide,
shining eyes. Together, he and Harry looked down at
the silver hilt of the knife protruding from the elf’s
heaving chest.
“Dobby — no — HELP!” Harry bellowed toward the
cottage, toward the people moving there. “HELP!”
 
He did not know or care whether they were wizards or
Muggles, friends or foes; all he cared about was that a
dark stain was spreading across Dobby’s front, and
that he had stretched out his thin arms to Harry with
a look of supplication. Harry caught him and laid him
sideways on the cool grass.
“Dobby, no, don’t die, don’t die — ”
The elf’s eyes found him, and his lips trembled with
the effort to form words.
“Harry ... Potter ...”
And then with a little shudder the elf became quite
still, and his eyes were nothing more than great
glassy orbs, sprinkled with light from the stars they
could not see.
 
THE WANDMAKER
It was like sinking into an old nightmare; for an
instant Harry knelt again beside Dumbledore’s body
at the foot of the tallest tower at Hogwarts, but in
reality he was staring at a tiny body curled upon the
grass, pierced by Bellatrix’s silver knife. Harry’s voice
was still saying, “Dobby ... Dobby ...” even though he
knew that the elf had gone where he could not call
him back.
After a minute or so he realized that they had, after
all, come to the right place, for here were Bill and
Fleur, Dean and Luna, gathering around him as he
knelt over the elf.
“Hermione?” he said suddenly. “Where is she?”
“Ron’s taken her inside,” said Bill. “She’ll be all right.”
Harry looked back down at Dobby. He stretched out a
hand and pulled the sharp blade from the elf’s body,
then dragged off his own jacket and covered Dobby in
it like a blanket.
 
The sea was rushing against rock somewhere nearby;
Harry listened to it while the others talked, discussing
matters in which he could take no interest, making
decisions. Dean carried the injured Griphook into the
house, Fleur hurrying with them; now Bill was
making suggestions about burying the elf. Harry
agreed without really knowing what he was saying. As
he did so, he gazed down at the tiny body, and his
scar prickled and burned, and in one part of his
mind, viewed as if from the wrong end of a long
telescope, he saw Voldemort punishing those they
had left behind at Malfoy Manor. His rage was
dreadful and yet Harry’s grief for Dobby seemed to
diminish it, so that it became a distant storm that
reached Harry from across a vast, silent ocean.
“I want to do it properly,” were the first words of
which Harry was fully conscious of speaking. “Not by
magic. Have you got a spade?”
And shortly afterward he had set to work, alone,
digging the grave in the place that Bill had shown him
at the end of the garden, between bushes. He dug
with a kind of fury, relishing the manual work,
glorying in the non-magic of it, for every drop of his
sweat and every blister felt like a gift to the elf who
had saved their lives.
His scar burned, but he was master of the pain; he
felt it, yet was apart from it. He had learned control at
last, learned to shut his mind to Voldemort, the very
thing Dumbledore had wanted him to learn from
Snape. Just as Voldemort had not been able to
possess Harry while Harry was consumed with grief
for Sirius, so his thoughts could not penetrate Harry
now, while he mourned Dobby. Grief, it seemed, drove
Voldemort out ... though Dumbledore, of course,
would have said that it was love. ...
 
On Harry dug, deeper and deeper into the hard, cold
earth, subsuming his grief in sweat, denying the pain
in his scar. In the darkness, with nothing but the
sound of his own breath and the rushing sea to keep
him company, the things that had happened at the
Malfoys’ returned to him, the things he had heard
came back to him, and understanding blossomed in
the darkness. ...
The steady rhythm of his arms beat time with his
thoughts. Hallows ... Horcruxes ... Hallows ...
Horcruxes ... Yet he no longer burned with that weird,
obsessive longing. Loss and fear had snuffed it out:
He felt as though he had been slapped awake again.
Deeper and deeper Harry sank into the grave, and he
knew where Voldemort had been tonight, and whom
he had killed in the topmost cell of Nurmengard, and
why. ...
And he thought of Wormtail, dead because of one
small unconscious impulse of mercy. . . . Dumbledore
had foreseen that. ... How much more had he known?
Harry lost track of time. He knew only that the
darkness had lightened a few degrees when he was
rejoined by Ron and Dean.
“How’s Hermione?”
“Better,” said Ron. “Fleur’s looking after her.”
Harry had his retort ready for when they asked him
why he had not simply created a perfect grave with
his wand, but he did not need it. They jumped down
into the hole he had made with spades of their own,
and together they worked in silence until the hole
seemed deep enough.
 
Harry wrapped the elf more snugly in his jacket. Ron
sat on the edge of the grave and stripped off his shoes
and socks, which he placed upon the elf’s bare feet.
Dean produced a woolen hat, which Harry placed
carefully upon Dobby’s head, muffling his batlike
ears.
“We should close his eyes.”
Harry had not heard the others coming through the
darkness. Bill was wearing a traveling cloak, Fleur a
large white apron, from the pocket of which protruded
a bottle of what Harry recognized to be Skele-Gro.
Hermione was wrapped in a borrowed dressing gown,
pale and unsteady on her feet; Ron put an arm
around her when she reached him. Luna, who was
huddled in one of Fleur’s coats, crouched down and
placed her fingers tenderly upon each of the elf’s
eyelids, sliding them over his glassy stare.
“There,” she said softly. “Now he could be sleeping.”
Harry placed the elf into the grave, arranged his tiny
limbs so that he might have been resting, then
climbed out and gazed for the last time upon the little
body. He forced himself not to break down as he
remembered Dumbledore’s funeral, and the rows and
rows of golden chairs, and the Minister of Magic in
the front row, the recitation of Dumbledore’s
achievements, the stateliness of the white marble
tomb. He felt that Dobby deserved just as grand a
funeral, and yet here the elf lay between bushes in a
roughly dug hole.
“I think we ought to say something,” piped up Luna.
“I’ll go first, shall I?”
And as everybody looked at her, she addressed the
dead elf at the bottom of the grave.
 
“Thank you so much, Dobby, for rescuing me from
that cellar. It’s so unfair that you had to die, when
you were so good and brave. I’ll always remember
what you did for us. I hope you’re happy now.”
She turned and looked expectantly at Ron, who
cleared his throat and said in a thick voice, “Yeah ...
thanks, Dobby.”
“Thanks,” muttered Dean.
Harry swallowed.
“Good-bye, Dobby,” he said. It was all he could
manage, but Luna had said it all for him. Bill raised
his wand, and the pile of earth beside the grave rose
up into the air and fell neatly upon it, a small,
reddish mound.
“D’you mind if I stay here a moment?” he asked the
others.
They murmured words he did not catch; he felt gentle
pats upon his back, and then they all traipsed back
toward the cottage, leaving Harry alone beside the elf.
He looked around: There were a number of large
white stones, smoothed by the sea, marking the edge
of the flower beds. He picked up one of the largest
and laid it, pillowlike, over the place where Dobby ’s
head now rested. He then felt in his pocket for a
wand.
There were two in there. He had forgotten, lost track;
he could not now remember whose wands these were;
he seemed to remember wrenching them out of
someone’s hand. He selected the shorter of the two,
which felt friendlier in his hand, and pointed it at the
rock.
 
Slowly, under his murmured instruction, deep cuts
appeared upon the rock’s surface. He knew that
Hermione could have done it more neatly, and
probably more quickly, but he wanted to mark the
spot as he had wanted to dig the grave. When Harry
stood up again, the stone read:
HERE LIES DOBBY, A FREE ELF.
He looked down at his handiwork for a few more
seconds, then walked away, his scar still prickling a
little, and his mind full of those things that had come
to him in the grave, ideas that had taken shape in the
darkness, ideas both fascinating and terrible.
They were all sitting in the living room when he
entered the little hall, their attention focused upon
Bill, who was talking. The room was light-colored,
pretty, with a small fire of driftwood burning brightly
in the fireplace. Harry did not want to drop mud upon
the carpet, so he stood in the doorway, listening.
"... lucky that Ginny’s on holiday. If she’d been at
Hogwarts, they could have taken her before we
reached her. Now we know she’s safe too.”
He looked around and saw Harry standing there.
“I’ve been getting them all out of the Burrow,” he
explained. “Moved them to Muriel’s. The Death Eaters
know Ron’s with you now, they’re bound to target the
family — don’t apologize,” he added at the sight of
Harry’s expression. “It was always a matter of time,
Dad’s been saying so for months. We’re the biggest
blood-traitor family there is.”
“How are they protected?” asked Harry.
 
“Fidelius Charm. Dad’s Secret-Keeper. And we’ve
done it on this cottage too; I’m Secret-Keeper here.
None of us can go to work, but that’s hardly the most
important thing now. Once Ollivander and Griphook
are well enough, we’ll move them to Muriel’s too.
There isn’t much room here, but she’s got plenty.
Griphook’s legs are on the mend, Fleur’s given him
Skele-Gro; we could probably move them in an hour
or —
“No,” Harry said, and Bill looked startled. “I need both
of them here. I need to talk to them. It’s important.”
He heard the authority in his own voice, the
conviction, the sense of purpose that had come to him
as he dug Dobby’s grave. All of their faces were
turned toward him, looking puzzled.
“I’m going to wash,” Harry told Bill, looking down at
his hands, still covered in mud and Dobby’s blood.
“Then 111 need to see them, straightaway.”
He walked into the little kitchen, to the basin beneath
a window overlooking the sea. Dawn was breaking
over the horizon, shell pink and faintly gold, as he
washed, again following the train of thought that had
come to him in the dark garden. ...
Dobby would never be able to tell them who had sent
him to the cellar, but Harry knew what he had seen.
A piercing blue eye had looked out of the mirror
fragment, and then help had come. Help will always
be given at Hog warts to those who ask for it
Harry dried his hands, impervious to the beauty of
the scene outside the window and to the murmuring
of the others in the sitting room. He looked out over
the ocean and felt closer, this dawn, than ever before,
closer to the heart of it all.
 
And still his scar prickled, and he knew that
Voldemort was getting there too. Harry understood
and yet did not understand. His instinct was telling
him one thing, his brain quite another. The
Dumbledore in Harry’s head smiled, surveying Harry
over the tips of his fingers, pressed together as if in
prayer.
You gave Ron the Deluminator. You understood him. . . .
You gave him a way back. . . .
And you understood Wormtail too. ... You knew there
was a bit of regret there, somewhere. ...
And if you knew them ... What did you know about
me, Dumbledore?
Am I meant to know, but not to seek? Did you know
how hard I’d find that? Is that why you made it this
difficult? So I’d have time to work that out?
Harry stood quite still, eyes glazed, watching the place
where a bright gold rim of dazzling sun was rising
over the horizon. Then he looked down at his clean
hands and was momentarily surprised to see the
cloth he was holding in them. He set it down and
returned to the hall, and as he did so, he felt his scar
pulse angrily, and there flashed across his mind, swift
as the reflection of a dragonfly over water, the outline
of a building he knew extremely well.
Bill and Fleur were standing at the foot of the stairs.
“I need to speak to Griphook and Ollivander,” Harry
said.
“No,” said Fleur. “You will ’ave to wait, ’Arry. Zey are
both ill, tired — ”
 
“I’m sorry,” he said without heat, “but it can’t wait. I
need to talk to them now. Privately — and separately.
It’s urgent.”
“Harry, what the hell’s going on?” asked Bill. “You
turn up here with a dead house-elf and a half-
conscious goblin, Hermione looks as though she’s
been tortured, and Ron’s just refused to tell me
anything — ”
“We can’t tell you what we’re doing,” said Harry flatly.
“You’re in the Order, Bill, you know Dumbledore left
us a mission. We’re not supposed to talk about it to
anyone else.”
Fleur made an impatient noise, but Bill did not look
at her; he was staring at Harry. His deeply scarred
face was hard to read. Finally Bill said, “All right. Who
do you want to talk to first?”
Harry hesitated. He knew what hung on his decision.
There was hardly any time left; now was the moment
to decide: Horcruxes or Hallows?
“Griphook,” Harry said. “I’ll speak to Griphook first.”
His heart was racing as if he had been sprinting and
had just cleared an enormous obstacle.
“Up here, then,” said Bill, leading the way.
Harry had walked up several steps before stopping
and looking back.
“I need you two as well!” he called to Ron and
Hermione, who had been skulking, half concealed, in
the doorway of the sitting room.
They both moved into the light, looking oddly relieved.
 
“How are you?” Harry asked Hermione. “You were
amazing — coming up with that story when she was
hurting you like that — ”
Hermione gave a weak smile as Ron gave her a one-
armed squeeze.
“What are we doing now, Harry?” he asked.
“You’ll see. Come on.”
Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed Bill up the steep
stairs onto a small landing. Three doors led off it.
“In here,” said Bill, opening the door into his and
Fleur’s room. It too had a view of the sea, now flecked
with gold in the sunrise. Harry moved to the window,
turned his back on the spectacular view, and waited,
his arms folded, his scar prickling. Hermione took the
chair beside the dressing table; Ron sat on the arm.
Bill reappeared, carrying the little goblin, whom he
set down carefully upon the bed. Griphook grunted
thanks, and Bill left, closing the door upon them all.
“I’m sorry to take you out of bed,” said Harry. “How
are your legs?”
“Painful,” replied the goblin. “But mending.”
He was still clutching the sword of Gryffindor, and
wore a strange look: half truculent, half intrigued.
Harry noted the goblin’s sallow skin, his long thin
fingers, his black eyes. Fleur had removed his shoes:
His long feet were dirty. He was larger than a house-
elf, but not by much. His domed head was much
bigger than a human’s.
“You probably don’t remember — ” Harry began.
 
“ — that I was the goblin who showed you to your
vault, the first time you ever visited Gringotts?” said
Griphook. “I remember, Harry Potter. Even amongst
goblins, you are very famous.”
Harry and the goblin looked at each other, sizing each
other up. Harry’s scar was still prickling. He wanted
to get through this interview with Griphook quickly,
and at the same time was afraid of making a false
move. While he tried to decide on the best way to
approach his request, the goblin broke the silence.
“You buried the elf,” he said, sounding unexpectedly
rancorous. “I watched you from the window of the
bedroom next door.”
“Yes,” said Harry.
Griphook looked at him out of the corners of his
slanting black eyes.
“You are an unusual wizard, Harry Potter.”
“In what way?” asked Harry, rubbing his scar
absently.
“You dug the grave.”
“So?”
Griphook did not answer. Harry rather thought he
was being sneered at for acting like a Muggle, but it
did not much matter to him whether Griphook
approved of Dobby’s grave or not. He gathered himself
for the attack.
“Griphook, I need to ask — ”
“You also rescued a goblin.”
 
“What?”
“You brought me here. Saved me.”
“Well, I take it you’re not sorry?” said Harry a little
impatiently.
“No, Harry Potter,” said Griphook, and with one finger
he twisted the thin black beard upon his chin, “but
you are a very odd wizard.”
“Right,” said Harry. “Well, I need some help,
Griphook, and you can give it to me.”
The goblin made no sign of encouragement, but
continued to frown at Harry as though he had never
seen anything like him.
“I need to break into a Gringotts vault.”
Harry had not meant to say it so baldly; the words
were forced from him as pain shot through his
lightning scar and he saw, again, the outline of
Hogwarts. He closed his mind firmly. He needed to
deal with Griphook first. Ron and Hermione were
staring at Harry as though he had gone mad.
“Harry — ” said Hermione, but she was cut off by
Griphook.
“Break into a Gringotts vault?” repeated the goblin,
wincing a little as he shifted his position upon the
bed. “It is impossible.”
“No, it isn’t,” Ron contradicted him. “It’s been done.”
“Yeah,” said Harry. “The same day I first met you,
Griphook. My birthday, seven years ago.”
 
“The vault in question was empty at the time,”
snapped the goblin, and Harry understood that even
though Griphook had left Gringotts, he was offended
at the idea of its defenses being breached. “Its
protection was minimal.”
“Well, the vault we need to get into isn’t empty, and
I’m guessing its protection will be pretty powerful,”
said Harry. “It belongs to the Lestranges.”
He saw Hermione and Ron look at each other,
astonished, but there would be time enough to
explain after Griphook had given his answer.
“You have no chance,” said Griphook flatly. “No
chance at all. If you seek beneath our floors, a
treasure that was never yours — ”
“Thief you have been warned, beware — yeah, I
know, I remember,” said Harry. “But I’m not trying to
get myself any treasure, I’m not trying to take
anything for personal gain. Can you believe that?”
The goblin looked slantwise at Harry, and the
lightning scar on Harry’s forehead prickled, but he
ignored it, refusing to acknowledge its pain or its
invitation.
“If there was a wizard of whom I would believe that
they did not seek personal gain,” said Griphook
finally, “it would be you, Harry Potter. Goblins and
elves are not used to the protection or the respect
that you have shown this night. Not from wand-
carriers.”
“Wand-carriers,” repeated Harry: The phrase fell oddly
upon his ears as his scar prickled, as Voldemort
turned his thoughts northward, and as Harry burned
to question Ollivander next door.
 
“The right to carry a wand,” said the goblin quietly,
“has long been contested between wizards and
goblins.”
“Well, goblins can do magic without wands,” said
Ron.
“That is immaterial! Wizards refuse to share the
secrets of wand-lore with other magical beings, they
deny us the possibility of extending our powers!”
“Well, goblins won’t share any of their magic either,”
said Ron. “You won’t tell us how to make swords and
armor the way you do. Goblins know how to work
metal in a way wizards have never — ”
“It doesn’t matter,” said Harry, noting Griphook’s
rising color. “This isn’t about wizards versus goblins
or any other sort of magical creature — ”
Griphook gave a nasty laugh.
“But it is, it is about precisely that! As the Dark Lord
becomes ever more powerful, your race is set still
more firmly above mine! Gringotts falls under
Wizarding rule, house-elves are slaughtered, and who
amongst the wand-carriers protests?”
“We do!” said Hermione. She had sat up straight, her
eyes bright. “We protest! And I’m hunted quite as
much as any goblin or elf, Griphook! I’m a Mudblood!”
“Don’t call yourself — ” Ron muttered.
“Why shouldn’t I?” said Hermione. “Mudblood, and
proud of it! I’ve got no higher position under this new
order than you have, Griphook! It was me they chose
to torture, back at the Malfoys’!”
 
As she spoke, she pulled aside the neck of the
dressing gown to reveal the thin cut Bellatrix had
made, scarlet against her throat.
“Did you know that it was Harry who set Dobby free?”
she asked. “Did you know that we’ve wanted elves to
be freed for years?” (Ron fidgeted uncomfortably on
the arm of Hermione’s chair.) “You can’t want You-
Know-Who defeated more than we do, Griphook!”
The goblin gazed at Hermione with the same curiosity
he had shown Harry.
“What do you seek within the Lestranges’ vault?” he
asked abruptly. “The sword that lies inside it is a
fake. This is the real one.” He looked from one to the
other of them. “I think that you already know this.
You asked me to lie for you back there.”
“But the fake sword isn’t the only thing in that vault,
is it?” asked Harry. “Perhaps you’ve seen the other
things in there?”
His heart was pounding harder than ever. He
redoubled his efforts to ignore the pulsing of his scar.
The goblin twisted his beard around his finger again.
“It is against our code to speak of the secrets of
Gringotts. We are the guardians of fabulous
treasures. We have a duty to the objects placed in our
care, which were, so often, wrought by our fingers.”
The goblin stroked the sword, and his black eyes
roved from Harry to Hermione to Ron and then back
again.
“So young,” he said finally, “to be fighting so many.”
 
“Will you help us?” said Harry. “We haven’t got a hope
of breaking in without a goblin’s help. You’re our one
chance.”
“I shall ... think about it,” said Griphook
maddeningly.
“But — ” Ron started angrily; Hermione nudged him in
the ribs.
“Thank you,” said Harry.
The goblin bowed his great domed head in
acknowledgement, then flexed his short legs.
“I think,” he said, settling himself ostentatiously upon
Bill and Fleur’s bed, “that the Skele-Gro has finished
its work. I may be able to sleep at last. Forgive me. ...”
“Yeah, of course,” said Harry, but before leaving the
room he leaned forward and took the sword of
Gryffindor from beside the goblin. Griphook did not
protest, but Harry thought he saw resentment in the
goblin’s eyes as he closed the door upon him.
“Little git,” whispered Ron. “He’s enjoying keeping us
hanging.”
“Harry,” whispered Hermione, pulling them both away
from the door, into the middle of the still-dark
landing, “are you saying what I think you’re saying?
Are you saying there’s a Horcrux in the Lestranges’
vault?”
“Yes,” said Harry. “Bellatrix was terrified when she
thought we’d been in there, she was beside herself.
Why? What did she think we’d seen, what else did she
think we might have taken? Something she was
petrified You-Know-Who would find out about.”
 
“But I thought we were looking for places You-Know-
Who’s been, places he’s done something important?”
said Ron, looking baffled. “Was he ever inside the
Lestranges’ vault?”
“I don’t know whether he was ever inside Gringotts,”
said Harry. “He never had gold there when he was
younger, because nobody left him anything. He would
have seen the bank from the outside, though, the first
time he ever went to Diagon Alley.”
Harry’s scar throbbed, but he ignored it; he wanted
Ron and Hermione to understand about Gringotts
before they spoke to Ollivander.
“I think he would have envied anyone who had a key
to a Gringotts vault. I think he’d have seen it as a real
symbol of belonging to the Wizarding world. And don’t
forget, he trusted Bellatrix and her husband. They
were his most devoted servants before he fell, and
they went looking for him after he vanished. He said it
the night he came back, I heard him.”
Harry rubbed his scar.
“I don’t think he’d have told Bellatrix it was a
Horcrux, though. He never told Lucius Malfoy the
truth about the diary. He probably told her it was a
treasured possession and asked her to place it in her
vault. The safest place in the world for anything you
want to hide, Hagrid told me ... except for Hogwarts.”
When Harry had finished speaking, Ron shook his
head.
“You really understand him.”
 
“Bits of him,” said Harry. “Bits ... I just wish I’d
understood Dumbledore as much. But well see.
Come on — Ollivander now.”
Ron and Hermione looked bewildered but impressed
as they followed him across the little landing and
knocked upon the door opposite Bill and Fleur’s. A
weak “Come in!” answered them.
The wandmaker was lying on the twin bed farthest
from the window. He had been held in the cellar for
more than a year, and tortured, Harry knew, on at
least one occasion. He was emaciated, the bones of
his face sticking out sharply against the yellowish
skin. His great silver eyes seemed vast in their
sunken sockets. The hands that lay upon the blanket
could have belonged to a skeleton. Harry sat down on
the empty bed, beside Ron and Hermione. The rising
sun was not visible here. The room faced the cliff- top
garden and the freshly dug grave.
“Mr. Ollivander, I’m sorry to disturb you,” Harry said.
“My dear boy.” Ollivander’s voice was feeble. “You
rescued us. I thought we would die in that place. I
can never thank you ... never thank you ... enough.”
“We were glad to do it.”
Harry’s scar throbbed. He knew, he was certain, that
there was hardly any time left in which to beat
Voldemort to his goal, or else to attempt to thwart
him. He felt a flutter of panic ... yet he had made his
decision when he chose to speak to Griphook first.
Feigning a calm he did not feel, he groped in the
pouch around his neck and took out the two halves of
his broken wand.
“Mr. Ollivander, I need some help.”
 
“Anything. Anything,” said the wandmaker weakly.
“Can you mend this? Is it possible?”
Ollivander held out a trembling hand, and Harry
placed the two barely connected halves into his palm.
“Holly and phoenix feather,” said Ollivander in a
tremulous voice. “Eleven inches. Nice and supple.”
“Yes,” said Harry. “Can you — ?”
“No,” whispered Ollivander. “I am sorry, very sorry,
but a wand that has suffered this degree of damage
cannot be repaired by any means that I know of.”
Harry had been braced to hear it, but it was a blow
nevertheless. He took the wand halves back and
replaced them in the pouch around his neck.
Ollivander stared at the place where the shattered
wand had vanished, and did not look away until
Harry had taken from his pocket the two wands he
had brought from the Malfoys’.
“Can you identify these?” Harry asked.
The wandmaker took the first of the wands and held
it close to his faded eyes, rolling it between his
knobble-knuckled fingers, flexing it slightly.
“Walnut and dragon heartstring,” he said. “Twelve-
and-three-quarter inches. Unyielding. This wand
belonged to Bellatrix Lestrange.”
“And this one?”
Ollivander performed the same examination.
 
“Hawthorn and unicorn hair. Ten inches precisely.
Reasonably springy. This was the wand of Draco
Malfoy.”
“Was?” repeated Harry. “Isn’t it still his?”
“Perhaps not. If you took it — ”
“— I did — ”
“ — then it may be yours. Of course, the manner of
taking matters. Much also depends upon the wand
itself. In general, however, where a wand has been
won, its allegiance will change.”
There was silence in the room, except for the distant
rushing of the sea.
“You talk about wands like they’ve got feelings,” said
Harry, “like they can think for themselves.”
“The wand chooses the wizard,” said Ollivander. “That
much has always been clear to those of us who have
studied wandlore.”
“A person can still use a wand that hasn’t chosen
them, though?” asked Harry.
“Oh yes, if you are any wizard at all you will be able to
channel your magic through almost any instrument.
The best results, however, must always come where
there is the strongest affinity between wizard and
wand. These connections are complex. An initial
attraction, and then a mutual quest for experience,
the wand learning from the wizard, the wizard from
the wand.”
The sea gushed forward and backward; it was a
mournful sound.
 
“I took this wand from Draco Malfoy by force,” said
Harry. “Can I use it safely?”
“I think so. Subtle laws govern wand ownership, but
the conquered wand will usually bend its will to its
new master.”
“So I should use this one?” said Ron, pulling
Wormtail’s wand out of his pocket and handing it to
Ollivander.
“Chestnut and dragon heartstring. Nine-and-a-
quarter inches. Brittle. I was forced to make this
shortly after my kidnapping, for Peter Pettigrew. Yes,
if you won it, it is more likely to do your bidding, and
do it well, than another wand.”
“And this holds true for all wands, does it?” asked
Harry.
“I think so,” replied Ollivander, his protuberant eyes
upon Harry’s face. “You ask deep questions, Mr.
Potter. Wandlore is a complex and mysterious branch
of magic.”
“So, it isn’t necessary to kill the previous owner to
take true possession of a wand?” asked Harry.
Ollivander swallowed.
“Necessary? No, I should not say that it is necessary
to kill.”
“There are legends, though,” said Harry, and as his
heart rate quickened, the pain in his scar became
more intense; he was sure that Voldemort had
decided to put his idea into action. “Legends about a
wand — or wands — that have passed from hand to
hand by murder.”
 
Ollivander turned pale. Against the snowy pillow he
was light gray, and his eyes were enormous,
bloodshot, and bulging with what looked like fear.
“Only one wand, I think,” he whispered.
“And You-Know-Who is interested in it, isn’t he?”
asked Harry.
“I — how?” croaked Ollivander, and he looked
appealingly at Ron and Hermione for help. “How do
you know this?”
“He wanted you to tell him how to overcome the
connection between our wands,” said Harry.
Ollivander looked terrified.
“He tortured me, you must understand that! The
Cruciatus Curse, I — I had no choice but to tell him
what I knew, what I guessed!”
“I understand,” said Harry. “You told him about the
twin cores? You said he just had to borrow another
wizard’s wand?”
Ollivander looked horrified, transfixed, by the amount
that Harry knew. He nodded slowly.
“But it didn’t work,” Harry went on. “Mine still beat
the borrowed wand. Do you know why that is?”
Ollivander shook his head as slowly as he had just
nodded.
“I had ... never heard of such a thing. Your wand
performed something unique that night. The
connection of the twin cores is incredibly rare, yet
 
why your wand should have snapped the borrowed
wand, I do not know. ...”
“We were talking about the other wand, the wand that
changes hands by murder. When You-Know-Who
realized my wand had done something strange, he
came back and asked about that other wand, didn’t
he?”
“How do you know this?”
Harry did not answer.
“Yes, he asked,” whispered Ollivander. “He wanted to
know everything I could tell him about the wand
variously known as the Deathstick, the Wand of
Destiny, or the Elder Wand.”
Harry glanced sideways at Hermione. She looked
flabbergasted.
“The Dark Lord,” said Ollivander in hushed and
frightened tones, “had always been happy with the
wand I made him — yew and phoenix feather,
thirteen-and-a-half inches — until he discovered the
connection of the twin cores. Now he seeks another,
more powerful wand, as the only way to conquer
yours.”
“But he’ll know soon, if he doesn’t already, that
mine’s broken beyond repair,” said Harry quietly.
“No!” said Hermione, sounding frightened. “He can’t
know that, Harry, how could he — ?”
“Priori Incantatem,” said Harry. “We left your wand
and the blackthorn wand at the Malfoys’, Hermione. If
they examine them properly, make them re-create the
spells they’ve cast lately, they’ll see that yours broke
 
mine, they’ll see that you tried and failed to mend it,
and they’ll realize that I’ve been using the blackthorn
one ever since.”
The little color she had regained since their arrival
had drained from her face. Ron gave Harry a
reproachful look, and said, “Let’s not worry about
that now — ”
But Mr. Ollivander intervened.
“The Dark Lord no longer seeks the Elder Wand only
for your destruction, Mr. Potter. He is determined to
possess it because he believes it will make him truly
invulnerable.”
“And will it?”
“The owner of the Elder Wand must always fear
attack,” said Ollivander, “but the idea of the Dark
Lord in possession of the Deathstick is, I must admit
... formidable.”
Harry was suddenly reminded of how he had been
unsure, when they first met, of how much he liked
Ollivander. Even now, having been tortured and
imprisoned by Voldemort, the idea of the Dark wizard
in possession of this wand seemed to enthrall him as
much as it repulsed him.
“You — you really think this wand exists, then, Mr.
Ollivander?” asked Hermione.
“Oh yes,” said Ollivander. “Yes, it is perfectly possible
to trace the wand’s course through history. There are
gaps, of course, and long ones, where it vanishes from
view, temporarily lost or hidden; but always it
resurfaces. It has certain identifying characteristics
that those who are learned in wandlore recognize.
 
There are written accounts, some of them obscure,
that I and other wandmakers have made it our
business to study. They have the ring of authenticity.”
“So you — you don’t think it can be a fairy tale or a
myth?” Hermione asked hopefully.
“No,” said Ollivander. “Whether it needs to pass by
murder, I do not know. Its history is bloody, but that
may be simply due to the fact that it is such a
desirable object, and arouses such passions in
wizards. Immensely powerful, dangerous in the wrong
hands, and an object of incredible fascination to all of
us who study the power of wands.”
“Mr. Ollivander,” said Harry, “you told You-Know-Who
that Gregorovitch had the Elder Wand, didn’t you?”
Ollivander turned, if possible, even paler. He looked
ghostly as he gulped.
“But how — how do you — ?”
“Never mind how I know it,” said Harry, closing his
eyes momentarily as his scar burned and he saw, for
mere seconds, a vision of the main street in
Hogsmeade, still dark, because it was so much
farther north. “You told You-Know-Who that
Gregorovitch had the wand?”
“It was a rumor,” whispered Ollivander. “A rumor,
years and years ago, long before you were born! I
believe Gregorovitch himself started it. You can see
how good it would be for business: that he was
studying and duplicating the qualities of the Elder
Wand!”
“Yes, I can see that,” said Harry. He stood up. “Mr.
Ollivander, one last thing, and then we’ll let you get
 
some rest. What do you know about the Deathly
Hallows?”
“The — the what?” asked the wandmaker, looking
utterly bewildered.
“The Deathly Hallows.”
“I’m afraid I don’t know what you’re talking about. Is
this still something to do with wands?”
Harry looked into the sunken face and believed that
Ollivander was not acting. He did not know about the
Hallows.
“Thank you,” said Harry. “Thank you very much. We’ll
leave you to get some rest now.”
Ollivander looked stricken.
“He was torturing me!” he gasped. “The Cruciatus
Curse ... you have no idea. ...”
“I do,” said Harry. “I really do. Please get some rest.
Thank you for telling me all of this.”
He led Ron and Hermione down the staircase. Harry
caught a glimpse of Bill, Fleur, Luna, and Dean
sitting at the table in the kitchen, cups of tea in front
of them. They all looked up at Harry as he appeared
in the doorway, but he merely nodded to them and
continued into the garden, Ron and Hermione behind
him. The reddish mound of earth that covered Dobby
lay ahead, and Harry walked back to it, as the pain in
his head built more and more powerfully. It was a
huge effort now to close down the visions that were
forcing themselves upon him, but he knew that he
would have to resist only a little longer. He would
yield very soon, because he needed to know that his
 
theory was right. He must make only one more short
effort, so that he could explain to Ron and Hermione.
“Gregorovitch had the Elder Wand a long time ago,”
he said. “I saw You-Know-Who trying to find him.
When he tracked him down, he found that
Gregorovitch didn’t have it anymore: It was stolen
from him by Grindelwald. How Grindelwald found out
that Gregorovitch had it, I don’t know — but if
Gregorovitch was stupid enough to spread the rumor,
it can’t have been that difficult.”
Voldemort was at the gates of Hogwarts; Harry could
see him standing there, and see too the lamp bobbing
in the pre-dawn, coming closer and closer.
“And Grindelwald used the Elder Wand to become
powerful. And at the height of his power, when
Dumbledore knew he was the only one who could
stop him, he dueled Grindelwald and beat him, and
he took the Elder Wand.”
“Dumbledore had the Elder Wand?” said Ron. “But
then — where is it now?”
“At Hogwarts,” said Harry, fighting to remain with
them in the cliff-top garden.
“But then, let’s go!” said Ron urgently. “Harry, let’s go
and get it before he does!”
“It’s too late for that,” said Harry. He could not help
himself, but clutched his head, trying to help it resist.
“He knows where it is. He’s there now.”
“Harry!” Ron said furiously. “How long have you
known this — why have we been wasting time? Why
did you talk to Griphook first? We could have gone —
we could still go — ”
 
“No,” said Harry, and he sank to his knees in the
grass. “Hermione’s right. Dumbledore didn’t want me
to have it. He didn’t want me to take it. He wanted me
to get the Horcruxes.”
“The unbeatable wand, Harry!” moaned Ron.
“I’m not supposed to ... I’m supposed to get the
Horcruxes. ...”
And now everything was cool and dark: The sun was
barely visible over the horizon as he glided alongside
Snape, up through the grounds toward the lake.
“I shall join you in the castle shortly,” he said in his
high, cold voice. “Leave me now.”
Snape bowed and set off back up the path, his black
cloak billowing behind him. Harry walked slowly,
waiting for Snape ’s figure to disappear. It would not
do for Snape, or indeed anyone else, to see where he
was going. But there were no lights in the castle
windows, and he could conceal himself ... and in a
second he had cast upon himself a Disillusionment
Charm that hid him even from his own eyes.
And he walked on, around the edge of the lake, taking
in the outlines of the beloved castle, his first kingdom,
his birthright. ...
And here it was, beside the lake, reflected in the dark
waters. The white marble tomb, an unnecessary blot
on the familiar landscape. He felt again that rush of
controlled euphoria, that heady sense of purpose in
destruction. He raised the old yew wand: How fitting
that this would be its last great act.
 
The tomb split open from head to foot. The shrouded
figure was as long and thin as it had been in life. He
raised the wand again.
The wrappings fell open. The face was translucent,
pale, sunken, yet almost perfectly preserved. They
had left his spectacles on the crooked nose: He felt
amused derision. Dumbledore’s hands were folded
upon his chest, and there it lay, clutched beneath
them, buried with him.
Had the old fool imagined that marble or death would
protect the wand? Had he thought that the Dark Lord
would be scared to violate his tomb? The spiderlike
hand swooped and pulled the wand from
Dumbledore’s grasp, and as he took it, a shower of
sparks flew from its tip, sparkling over the corpse of
its last owner, ready to serve a new master at last.
 
SHELL COTTAGE
Bill and Fleur’s cottage stood alone on a cliff
overlooking the sea, its walls embedded with shells
and whitewashed. It was a lonely and beautiful place.
Wherever Harry went inside the tiny cottage or its
garden, he could hear the constant ebb and flow of
the sea, like the breathing of some great, slumbering
creature. He spent much of the next few days making
excuses to escape the crowded cottage, craving the
cliff-top view of open sky and wide, empty sea, and
the feel of cold, salty wind on his face.
The enormity of his decision not to race Voldemort to
the wand still scared Harry. He could not remember,
ever before, choosing not to act. He was full of doubts,
doubts that Ron could not help voicing whenever they
were together.
“What if Dumbledore wanted us to work out the
symbol in time to get the wand?” “What if working out
what the symbol meant made you ‘worthy’ to get the
Hallows?” “Harry, if that really is the Elder Wand,
how the hell are we supposed to finish off You-Know-
P a g e | 568 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
Who?” Harry had no answers: There were moments
when he wondered whether it had been outright
madness not to try to prevent Voldemort breaking
open the tomb. He could not even explain
satisfactorily why he had decided against it: Every
time he tried to reconstruct the internal arguments
that had led to his decision, they sounded feebler to
him.
The odd thing was that Hermione’s support made him
feel just as confused as Ron’s doubts. Now forced to
accept that the Elder Wand was real, she maintained
that it was an evil object, and that the way Voldemort
had taken possession of it was repellent, not to be
considered.
“You could never have done that, Harry,” she said
again and again. “You couldn’t have broken into
Dumbledore’s grave.”
But the idea of Dumbledore’s corpse frightened Harry
much less than the possibility that he might have
misunderstood the living Dumbledore’s intentions. He
felt that he was still groping in the dark; he had
chosen his path but kept looking back, wondering
whether he had misread the signs, whether he should
not have taken the other way. From time to time,
anger at Dumbledore crashed over him again,
powerful as the waves slamming themselves against
the cliff beneath the cottage, anger that Dumbledore
had not explained before he died.
“But is he dead?” said Ron, three days after they had
arrived at the cottage. Harry had been staring out
over the wall that separated the cottage garden from
the cliff when Ron and Hermione had found him; he
wished they had not, having no wish to join in with
their argument.
 
“Yes, he is, Ron, please don’t start that again!”
“Look at the facts, Hermione,” said Ron, speaking
across Harry, who continued to gaze at the horizon.
“The silver doe. The sword. The eye Harry saw in the
mirror — ”
“Harry admits he could have imagined the eye! Don’t
you, Harry?”
“I could have,” said Harry without looking at her.
“But you don’t think you did, do you?” asked Ron.
“No, I don’t,” said Harry.
“There you go!” said Ron quickly, before Hermione
could carry on. “If it wasn’t Dumbledore, explain how
Dobby knew we were in the cellar, Hermione?”
“I can’t — but can you explain how Dumbledore sent
him to us if he’s lying in a tomb at Hogwarts?”
“I dunno, it could’ve been his ghost!”
“Dumbledore wouldn’t come back as a ghost,” said
Harry. There was little about Dumbledore he was sure
of now, but he knew that much. “He would have gone
on.”
“What d’you mean, ‘gone on’?” asked Ron, but before
Harry could say any more, a voice behind them said, “
’Arry?”
Fleur had come out of the cottage, her long silver hair
flying in the breeze.
 
“ ’Arry, Grip’ook would like to speak to you. ’E eez in
ze smallest bedroom, ’e says ’e does not want to be
over’eard.”
Her dislike of the goblin sending her to deliver
messages was clear; she looked irritable as she
walked back around the house.
Griphook was waiting for them, as Fleur had said, in
the tiniest of the cottage’s three bedrooms, in which
Hermione and Luna slept by night. He had drawn the
red cotton curtains against the bright, cloudy sky,
which gave the room a fiery glow at odds with the rest
of the airy, light cottage.
“I have reached my decision, Harry Potter,” said the
goblin, who was sitting cross-legged in a low chair,
drumming its arms with his spindly fingers. “Though
the goblins of Gringotts will consider it base
treachery, I have decided to help you — ”
“That’s great!” said Harry, relief surging through him.
“Griphook, thank you, we’re really — ”
“ — in return,” said the goblin firmly, “for payment.”
Slightly taken aback, Harry hesitated.
“How much do you want? I’ve got gold.”
“Not gold,” said Griphook. “I have gold.”
His black eyes glittered; there were no whites to his
eyes.
“I want the sword. The sword of Godric Gryffindor.”
Harry’s spirits plummeted.
 
“You can’t have that,” he said. “I’m sorry.”
“Then,” said the goblin softly, “we have a problem.”
“We can give you something else,” said Ron eagerly.
“I’ll bet the Lestranges have got loads of stuff, you can
take your pick once we get into the vault.”
He had said the wrong thing. Griphook flushed
angrily.
“I am not a thief, boy! I am not trying to procure
treasures to which I have no right!”
“The sword’s ours — ”
“It is not,” said the goblin.
“We’re Gryffindors, and it was Godric Gryffindor’s — ”
“And before it was Gryffindor’s, whose was it?”
demanded the goblin, sitting up straight.
“No one’s,” said Ron. “It was made for him, wasn’t it?”
“No!” cried the goblin, bristling with anger as he
pointed a long finger at Ron. “Wizarding arrogance
again! That sword was Ragnuk the First’s, taken from
him by Godric Gryffindor! It is a lost treasure, a
masterpiece of goblinwork! It belongs with the
goblins! The sword is the price of my hire, take it or
leave it!”
Griphook glared at them. Harry glanced at the other
two, then said, “We need to discuss this, Griphook, if
that’s all right. Could you give us a few minutes?”
The goblin nodded, looking sour.
 
Downstairs in the empty sitting room, Harry walked
to the fireplace, brow furrowed, trying to think what
to do. Behind him, Ron said, “He’s having a laugh. We
can’t let him have that sword.”
“It is true?” Harry asked Hermione. “Was the sword
stolen by Gryffindor?”
“I don’t know,” she said hopelessly. “Wizarding history
often skates over what the wizards have done to other
magical races, but there’s no account that I know of
that says Gryffindor stole the sword.”
“It’ll be one of those goblin stories,” said Ron, “about
how the wizards are always trying to get one over on
them. I suppose we should think ourselves lucky he
hasn’t asked for one of our wands.”
“Goblins have got good reason to dislike wizards,
Ron,” said Hermione. “They’ve been treated brutally in
the past.”
“Goblins aren’t exactly fluffy little bunnies, though,
are they?” said Ron. “They’ve killed plenty of us.
They’ve fought dirty too.”
“But arguing with Griphook about whose race is most
underhanded and violent isn’t going to make him
more likely to help us, is it?”
There was a pause while they tried to think of a way
around the problem. Harry looked out of the window
at Dobby’s grave. Luna was arranging sea lavender in
a jam jar beside the headstone.
“Okay,” said Ron, and Harry turned back to face him,
“how’s this? We tell Griphook we need the sword until
we get inside the vault, and then he can have it.
 
There’s a fake in there, isn’t there? We switch them,
and give him the fake.”
“Ron, he’d know the difference better than we would!”
said Hermione. “He’s the only one who realized there
had been a swap!”
“Yeah, but we could scarper before he realizes — ”
He quailed beneath the look Hermione was giving
him.
“That,” she said quietly, “is despicable. Ask for his
help, then double-cross him? And you wonder why
goblins don’t like wizards, Ron?”
Ron’s ears had turned red.
“All right, all right! It was the only thing I could think
of! What’s your solution, then?”
“We need to offer him something else, something just
as valuable.”
“Brilliant. I’ll go and get one of our other ancient
goblin-made swords and you can gift wrap it.”
Silence fell between them again. Harry was sure that
the goblin would accept nothing but the sword, even
if they had something as valuable to offer him. Yet the
sword was their one, indispensable weapon against
the Horcruxes.
He closed his eyes for a moment or two and listened
to the rush of the sea. The idea that Gryffindor might
have stolen the sword was unpleasant to him: He had
always been proud to be a Gryffindor; Gryffindor had
been the champion of Muggle-borns, the wizard who
had clashed with the pureblood-loving Slytherin. ...
 
“Maybe he’s lying,” Harry said, opening his eyes
again. “Griphook. Maybe Gryffindor didn’t take the
sword. How do we know the goblin version of history’s
right?”
“Does it make a difference?” asked Hermione.
“Changes how I feel about it,” said Harry.
He took a deep breath.
“Well tell him he can have the sword after he’s helped
us get into that vault — but we’ll be careful to avoid
telling him exactly when he can have it.”
A grin spread slowly across Ron’s face. Hermione,
however, looked alarmed.
“Harry, we can’t — ”
“He can have it,” Harry went on, “after we’ve used it
on all of the Horcruxes. I’ll make sure he gets it then.
I’ll keep my word.”
“But that could be years!” said Hermione.
“I know that, but he needn’t. I won’t be lying ...
really.”
Harry met her eyes with a mixture of defiance and
shame. He remembered the words that had been
engraved over the gateway to Nurmengard: FOR THE
GREATER GOOD. He pushed the idea away. What
choice did they have?
“I don’t like it,” said Hermione.
“Nor do I, much,” Harry admitted.
 
“Well, I think it’s genius,” said Ron, standing up
again. “Let’s go and tell him.”
Back in the smallest bedroom, Harry made the offer,
careful to phrase it so as not to give any definite time
for the handover of the sword. Hermione frowned at
the floor while he was speaking; he felt irritated at
her, afraid that she might give the game away.
However, Griphook had eyes for nobody but Harry.
“I have your word, Harry Potter, that you will give me
the sword of Gryffindor if I help you?”
“Yes,” said Harry.
“Then shake,” said the goblin, holding out his hand.
Harry took it and shook. He wondered whether those
black eyes saw any misgivings in his own. Then
Griphook relinquished him, clapped his hands
together, and said, “So. We begin!”
It was like planning to break into the Ministry all over
again. They settled to work in the smallest bedroom,
which was kept, according to Griphook’s preference,
in semidarkness.
“I have visited the Lestranges’ vault only once,”
Griphook told them, “on the occasion I was told to
place inside it the false sword. It is one of the most
ancient chambers. The oldest Wizarding families store
their treasures at the deepest level, where the vaults
are largest and best protected. ...”
They remained shut in the cupboardlike room for
hours at a time. Slowly the days stretched into weeks.
There was problem after problem to overcome, not
least of which was that their store of Polyjuice Potion
was greatly depleted.
 
“There’s really only enough left for one of us,” said
Hermione, tilting the thick mudlike potion against the
lamplight.
“That’ll be enough,” said Harry, who was examining
Griphook’s hand-drawn map of the deepest
passageways.
The other inhabitants of Shell Cottage could hardly
fail to notice that something was going on now that
Harry, Ron, and Hermione only emerged for
mealtimes. Nobody asked questions, although Harry
often felt Bill’s eyes on the three of them at the table,
thoughtful, concerned.
The longer they spent together, the more Harry
realized that he did not much like the goblin.
Griphook was unexpectedly bloodthirsty, laughed at
the idea of pain in lesser creatures, and seemed to
relish the possibility that they might have to hurt
other wizards to reach the Lestranges’ vault. Harry
could tell that his distaste was shared by the other
two, but they did not discuss it: They needed
Griphook.
The goblin ate only grudgingly with the rest of them.
Even after his legs had mended, he continued to
request trays of food in his room, like the still-frail
Ollivander, until Bill (following an angry outburst
from Fleur) went upstairs to tell him that the
arrangement could not continue. Thereafter Griphook
joined them at the overcrowded table, although he
refused to eat the same food, insisting, instead, on
lumps of raw meat, roots, and various fungi.
Harry felt responsible: It was, after all, he who had
insisted that the goblin remain at Shell Cottage so
that he could question him; his fault that the whole
 
Weasley family had been driven into hiding, that Bill,
Fred, George, and Mr. Weasley could no longer work.
“I’m sorry,” he told Fleur, one blustery April evening
as he helped her prepare dinner. “I never meant you
to have to deal with all of this.”
She had just set some knives to work, chopping up
steaks for Griphook and Bill, who had preferred his
meat bloody ever since he had been attacked by
Greyback. While the knives sliced away behind her,
her somewhat irritable expression softened.
“ ’Arry, you saved my sister’s life, I do not forget.”
This was not, strictly speaking, true, but Harry
decided against reminding her that Gabrielle had
never been in real danger.
“Anyway,” Fleur went on, pointing her wand at a pot
of sauce on the stove, which began to bubble at once,
“Mr. Ollivander leaves for Muriel’s zis evening. Zat will
make zings easier. Ze goblin,” she scowled a little at
the mention of him, “can move downstairs, and you,
Ron, and Dean can take zat room.”
“We don’t mind sleeping in the living room,” said
Harry, who knew that Griphook would think poorly of
having to sleep on the sofa; keeping Griphook happy
was essential to their plans. “Don’t worry about us.”
And when she tried to protest he went on, “We’ll be off
your hands soon too, Ron, Hermione, and I. We won’t
need to be here much longer.”
“But what do you mean?” she said, frowning at him,
her wand pointing at the casserole dish now
suspended in midair. “Of course you must not leave,
you are safe ’ere!”
 
She looked rather like Mrs. Weasley as she said it,
and he was glad that the back door opened at that
moment. Luna and Dean entered, their hair damp
from the rain outside and their arms full of driftwood.
"... and tiny little ears,” Luna was saying, “a bit like a
hippo’s, Daddy says, only purple and hairy. And if
you want to call them, you have to hum; they prefer a
waltz, nothing too fast. ...”
Looking uncomfortable, Dean shrugged at Harry as
he passed, following Luna into the combined dining
and sitting room where Ron and Hermione were
laying the dinner table. Seizing the chance to escape
Fleur’s questions, Harry grabbed two jugs of pumpkin
juice and followed them.
"... and if you ever come to our house I’ll be able to
show you the horn, Daddy wrote to me about it but I
haven’t seen it yet, because the Death Eaters took me
from the Hogwarts Express and I never got home for
Christmas,” Luna was saying, as she and Dean relaid
the fire.
“Luna, we told you,” Hermione called over to her.
“That horn exploded. It came from an Erumpent, not
a Crumple-Horned Snorkack — ”
“No, it was definitely a Snorkack horn,” said Luna
serenely. “Daddy told me. It will probably have re-
formed by now, they mend themselves, you know.”
Hermione shook her head and continued laying down
forks as Bill appeared, leading Mr. Ollivander down
the stairs. The wandmaker still looked exceptionally
frail, and he clung to Bill’s arm as the latter
supported him, carrying a large suitcase.
 
‘Tm going to miss you, Mr. Ollivander,” said Luna,
approaching the old man.
“And I you, my dear,” said Ollivander, patting her on
the shoulder. “You were an inexpressible comfort to
me in that terrible place.”
“So, au revoir, Mr. Ollivander,” said Fleur, kissing him
on both cheeks. “And I wonder whezzer you could
oblige me by delivering a package to Bill’s Auntie
Muriel? I never returned ’er tiara.”
“It will be an honor,” said Ollivander with a little bow,
“the very least I can do in return for your generous
hospitality.”
Fleur drew out a worn velvet case, which she opened
to show the wandmaker. The tiara sat glittering and
twinkling in the light from the low-hanging lamp.
“Moonstones and diamonds,” said Griphook, who had
sidled into the room without Harry noticing. “Made by
goblins, I think?”
“And paid for by wizards,” said Bill quietly, and the
goblin shot him a look that was both furtive and
challenging.
A strong wind gusted against the cottage windows as
Bill and Ollivander set off into the night. The rest of
them squeezed in around the table; elbow to elbow
and with barely enough room to move, they started to
eat. The fire crackled and popped in the grate beside
them. Fleur, Harry noticed, was merely playing with
her food; she glanced at the window every few
minutes; however, Bill returned before they had
finished their first course, his long hair tangled by the
wind.
 
“Everything’s fine,” he told Fleur. “Ollivander settled
in, Mum and Dad say hello. Ginny sends you all her
love. Fred and George are driving Muriel up the wall,
they’re still operating an Owl-Order business out of
her back room. It cheered her up to have her tiara
back, though. She said she thought we’d stolen it.”
“Ah, she eez charmante, your aunt,” said Fleur
crossly, waving her wand and causing the dirty plates
to rise and form a stack in midair. She caught them
and marched out of the room.
“Daddy’s made a tiara,” piped up Luna. “Well, more of
a crown, really.”
Ron caught Harry’s eye and grinned; Harry knew that
he was remembering the ludicrous headdress they
had seen on their visit to Xenophilius.
“Yes, he’s trying to re-create the lost diadem of
Ravenclaw. He thinks he’s identified most of the main
elements now. Adding the billywig wings really made
a difference — ”
There was a bang on the front door. Everyone’s head
turned toward it. Fleur came running out of the
kitchen, looking frightened; Bill jumped to his feet,
his wand pointing at the door; Harry, Ron, and
Hermione did the same. Silently Griphook slipped
beneath the table, out of sight.
“Who is it?” Bill called.
“It is I, Remus John Lupin!” called a voice over the
howling wind. Harry experienced a thrill of fear; what
had happened? “I am a werewolf, married to
Nymphadora Tonks, and you, the Secret-Keeper of
Shell Cottage, told me the address and bade me come
in an emergency!”
 
“Lupin,” muttered Bill, and he ran to the door and
wrenched it open.
Lupin fell over the threshold. He was white-faced,
wrapped in a traveling cloak, his graying hair
windswept. He straightened up, looked around the
room, making sure of who was there, then cried
aloud, “It’s a boy! We’ve named him Ted, after Dora’s
father!”
Hermione shrieked.
“Wha — ? Tonks — Tonks has had the baby?”
“Yes, yes, she’s had the baby!” shouted Lupin. All
around the table came cries of delight, sighs of relief:
Hermione and Fleur both squealed,
“Congratulations!” and Ron said, “Blimey, a baby!” as
if he had never heard of such a thing before.
“Yes — yes — a boy,” said Lupin again, who seemed
dazed by his own happiness. He strode around the
table and hugged Harry; the scene in the basement of
Grimmauld Place might never have happened.
“You’ll be godfather?” he said as he released Harry.
“M-me?” stammered Harry
“You, yes, of course — Dora quite agrees, no one
better — ”
“I — yeah — blimey — ”
Harry felt overwhelmed, astonished, delighted; now
Bill was hurrying to fetch wine, and Fleur was
persuading Lupin to join them for a drink.
 
“I can’t stay long, I must get back,” said Lupin,
beaming around at them all: He looked years younger
than Harry had ever seen him. “Thank you, thank
you, Bill.”
Bill had soon filled all of their goblets, they stood and
raised them high in a toast.
“To Teddy Remus Lupin,” said Lupin, “a great wizard
in the making!”
“ ’Oo does ’e look like?” Fleur inquired.
“I think he looks like Dora, but she thinks he is like
me. Not much hair. It looked black when he was
born, but I swear it’s turned ginger in the hour since.
Probably be blond by the time I get back. Andromeda
says Tonks’s hair started changing color the day that
she was born.” He drained his goblet. “Oh, go on
then, just one more,” he added, beaming, as Bill made
to fill it again.
The wind buffeted the little cottage and the fire leapt
and crackled, and Bill was soon opening another
bottle of wine. Lupin’s news seemed to have taken
them out of themselves, removed them for a while
from their state of siege: Tidings of new life were
exhilarating. Only the goblin seemed untouched by
the suddenly festive atmosphere, and after a while he
slunk back to the bedroom he now occupied alone.
Harry thought he was the only one who had noticed
this, until he saw Bill’s eyes following the goblin up
the stairs.
“No ... no ... I really must get back,” said Lupin at
last, declining yet another goblet of wine. He got to his
feet and pulled his traveling cloak back around
himself.
 
“Good-bye, good-bye — I’ll try and bring some
pictures in a few days’ time — they’ll all be so glad to
know that I’ve seen you — ”
He fastened his cloak and made his farewells,
hugging the women and grasping hands with the
men, then, still beaming, returned into the wild night.
“Godfather, Harry!” said Bill as they walked into the
kitchen together, helping clear the table. “A real
honor! Congratulations!”
As Harry set down the empty goblets he was carrying,
Bill pulled the door behind him closed, shutting out
the still-voluble voices of the others, who were
continuing to celebrate even in Lupin’s absence.
“I wanted a private word, actually, Harry. It hasn’t
been easy to get an opportunity with the cottage this
full of people.”
Bill hesitated.
“Harry, you’re planning something with Griphook.”
It was a statement, not a question, and Harry did not
bother to deny it. He merely looked at Bill, waiting.
“I know goblins,” said Bill. “I’ve worked for Gringotts
ever since I left Hogwarts. As far as there can be
friendship between wizards and goblins, I have goblin
friends — or, at least, goblins I know well, and like.”
Again, Bill hesitated.
“Harry, what do you want from Griphook, and what
have you promised him in return?”
“I can’t tell you that,” said Harry. “Sorry, Bill.”
 
The kitchen door opened behind them; Fleur was
trying to bring through more empty goblets.
“Wait,” Bill told her. “Just a moment.”
She backed out and he closed the door again.
“Then I have to say this,” Bill went on. “If you have
struck any kind of bargain with Griphook, and most
particularly if that bargain involves treasure, you
must be exceptionally careful. Goblin notions of
ownership, payment, and repayment are not the same
as human ones.”
Harry felt a slight squirm of discomfort, as though a
small snake had stirred inside him.
“What do you mean?” he asked.
“We are talking about a different breed of being,” said
Bill. “Dealings between wizards and goblins have been
fraught for centuries — but you’ll know all that from
History of Magic. There has been fault on both sides, I
would never claim that wizards have been innocent.
However, there is a belief among some goblins, and
those at Gringotts are perhaps most prone to it, that
wizards cannot be trusted in matters of gold and
treasure, that they have no respect for goblin
ownership.”
“I respect — ” Harry began, but Bill shook his head.
“You don’t understand, Harry, nobody could
understand unless they have lived with goblins. To a
goblin, the rightful and true master of any object is
the maker, not the purchaser. All goblin-made objects
are, in goblin eyes, rightfully theirs.”
“But if it was bought — ”
 
“ — then they would consider it rented by the one who
had paid the money. They have, however, great
difficulty with the idea of goblin-made objects passing
from wizard to wizard. You saw Griphook’s face when
the tiara passed under his eyes. He disapproves. I
believe he thinks, as do the fiercest of his kind, that it
ought to have been returned to the goblins once the
original purchaser died. They consider our habit of
keeping goblin-made objects, passing them from
wizard to wizard without further payment, little more
than theft.”
Harry had an ominous feeling now; he wondered
whether Bill guessed more than he was letting on.
“All I am saying,” said Bill, setting his hand on the
door back into the sitting room, “is to be very careful
what you promise goblins, Harry. It would be less
dangerous to break into Gringotts than to renege on a
promise to a goblin.”
“Right,” said Harry as Bill opened the door, “yeah.
Thanks. I’ll bear that in mind.”
As he followed Bill back to the others a wry thought
came to him, born no doubt of the wine he had
drunk. He seemed set on course to become just as
reckless a godfather to Teddy Lupin as Sirius Black
had been to him.
 
GRINGOTTS
Their plans were made, their preparations complete;
in the smallest bedroom a single long, coarse black
hair (plucked from the sweater Hermione had been
wearing at Malfoy Manor) lay curled in a small glass
phial on the mantelpiece.
“And you’ll be using her actual wand,” said Harry,
nodding toward the walnut wand, “so I reckon you’ll
be pretty convincing.”
Hermione looked frightened that the wand might sting
or bite her as she picked it up.
“I hate this thing,” she said in a low voice. “I really
hate it. It feels all wrong, it doesn’t work properly for
me. ... It’s like a bit of her.”
Harry could not help but remember how Hermione
had dismissed his loathing of the blackthorn wand,
insisting that he was imagining things when it did not
work as well as his own, telling him to simply
practice. He chose not to repeat her own advice back
 
to her, however; the eve of their attempted assault on
Gringotts felt like the wrong moment to antagonize
her.
“It’ll probably help you get in character, though,” said
Ron. “Think what that wand’s done!”
“But that’s my point!” said Hermione. “This is the
wand that tortured Neville’s mum and dad, and who
knows how many other people? This is the wand that
killed Sirius!”
Harry had not thought of that: He looked down at the
wand and was visited by a brutal urge to snap it, to
slice it in half with Gryffindor’s sword, which was
propped against the wall beside him.
“I miss my wand,” Hermione said miserably. “I wish
Mr. Ollivander could have made me another one too.”
Mr. Ollivander had sent Luna a new wand that
morning. She was out on the back lawn at that
moment, testing its capabilities in the late afternoon
sun. Dean, who had lost his wand to the Snatchers,
was watching rather gloomily.
Harry looked down at the hawthorn wand that had
once belonged to Draco Malfoy. He had been
surprised, but pleased, to discover that it worked for
him at least as well as Hermione ’s had done.
Remembering what Ollivander had told them of the
secret workings of wands, Harry thought he knew
what Hermione ’s problem was: She had not won the
walnut wand’s allegiance by taking it personally from
Bellatrix.
The door of the bedroom opened and Griphook
entered. Harry reached instinctively for the hilt of the
sword and drew it close to him, but regretted his
 
action at once: He could tell that the goblin had
noticed. Seeking to gloss over the sticky moment, he
said, “We’ve just been checking the last-minute stuff,
Griphook. We’ve told Bill and Fleur we’re leaving
tomorrow, and we’ve told them not to get up to see us
off.”
They had been firm on this point, because Hermione
would need to transform into Bellatrix before they left,
and the less that Bill and Fleur knew or suspected
about what they were about to do, the better. They
had also explained that they would not be returning.
As they had lost Perkins’s old tent on the night that
the Snatchers caught them, Bill had lent them
another one. It was now packed inside the beaded
bag, which, Harry was impressed to learn, Hermione
had protected from the Snatchers by the simple
expedient of stuffing it down her sock.
Though he would miss Bill, Fleur, Luna, and Dean,
not to mention the home comforts they had enjoyed
over the last few weeks, Harry was looking forward to
escaping the confinement of Shell Cottage. He was
tired of trying to make sure that they were not
overheard, tired of being shut in the tiny, dark
bedroom. Most of all, he longed to be rid of Griphook.
However, precisely how and when they were to part
from the goblin without handing over Gryffindor’s
sword remained a question to which Harry had no
answer. It had been impossible to decide how they
were going to do it, because the goblin rarely left
Harry, Ron, and Hermione alone together for more
than five minutes at a time: “He could give my mother
lessons,” growled Ron, as the goblin’s long fingers
kept appearing around the edges of doors. With Bill’s
warning in mind, Harry could not help suspecting
that Griphook was on the watch for possible
skulduggery. Hermione disapproved so heartily of the
planned double-cross that Harry had given up
 
attempting to pick her brains on how best to do it;
Ron, on the rare occasions that they had been able to
snatch a few Griphook-free moments, had come up
with nothing better than “Well just have to wing it,
mate.”
Harry slept badly that night. Lying awake in the early
hours, he thought back to the way he had felt the
night before they had infiltrated the Ministry of Magic
and remembered a determination, almost an
excitement. Now he was experiencing jolts of anxiety,
nagging doubts: He could not shake off the fear that it
was all going to go wrong. He kept telling himself that
their plan was good, that Griphook knew what they
were facing, that they were well-prepared for all the
difficulties they were likely to encounter, yet still he
felt uneasy. Once or twice he heard Ron stir and was
sure that he too was awake, but they were sharing
the sitting room with Dean, so Harry did not speak.
It was a relief when six o’clock arrived and they could
slip out of their sleeping bags, dress in the
semidarkness, then creep out into the garden, where
they were to meet Hermione and Griphook. The dawn
was chilly, but there was little wind now that it was
May. Harry looked up at the stars still glimmering
palely in the dark sky and listened to the sea washing
backward and forward against the cliff: He was going
to miss the sound.
Small green shoots were forcing their way up through
the red earth of Dobby’s grave now; in a year’s time
the mound would be covered in flowers. The white
stone that bore the elf’s name had already acquired a
weathered look. He realized now that they could
hardly have laid Dobby to rest in a more beautiful
place, but Harry ached with sadness to think of
leaving him behind. Looking down on the grave, he
wondered yet again how the elf had known where to
 
come to rescue them. His fingers moved
absentmindedly to the little pouch still strung around
his neck, through which he could feel the jagged
mirror fragment in which he had been sure he had
seen Dumbledore’s eye. Then the sound of a door
opening made him look around.
Bellatrix Lestrange was striding across the lawn
toward them, accompanied by Griphook. As she
walked, she was tucking the small, beaded bag into
the inside pocket of another set of the old robes they
had taken from Grimmauld Place. Though Harry
knew perfectly well that it was really Hermione, he
could not suppress a shiver of loathing. She was taller
than he was, her long black hair rippling down her
back, her heavily lidded eyes disdainful as they rested
upon him; but then she spoke, and he heard
Hermione through Bellatrix’s low voice.
“She tasted disgusting, worse than Gurdyroots! Okay,
Ron, come here so I can do you. ...”
“Right, but remember, I don’t like the beard too long
“Oh, for heaven’s sake, this isn’t about looking
handsome — ” “It’s not that, it gets in the way! But I
liked my nose a bit shorter, try and do it the way you
did last time.”
Hermione sighed and set to work, muttering under
her breath as she transformed various aspects of
Ron’s appearance. He was to be given a completely
fake identity, and they were trusting to the malevolent
aura cast by Bellatrix to protect him. Meanwhile
Harry and Griphook were to be concealed under the
Invisibility Cloak.
“There,” said Hermione, “how does he look, Harry?”
 
It was just possible to discern Ron under his disguise,
but only, Harry thought, because he knew him so
well. Ron’s hair was now long and wavy; he had a
thick brown beard and mustache, no freckles, a
short, broad nose, and heavy eyebrows.
“Well, he’s not my type, but he’ll do,” said Harry.
“Shall we go, then?”
All three of them glanced back at Shell Cottage, lying
dark and silent under the fading stars, then turned
and began to walk toward the point, just beyond the
boundary wall, where the Fidelius Charm stopped
working and they would be able to Disapparate. Once
past the gate, Griphook spoke.
“I should climb up now, Harry Potter, I think?”
Harry bent down and the goblin clambered onto his
back, his hands linked in front of Harry’s throat. He
was not heavy, but Harry disliked the feeling of the
goblin and the surprising strength with which he
clung on. Hermione pulled the Invisibility Cloak out of
the beaded bag and threw it over them both.
“Perfect,” she said, bending down to check Harry’s
feet. “I can’t see a thing. Let’s go.”
Harry turned on the spot, with Griphook on his
shoulders, concentrating with all his might on the
Leaky Cauldron, the inn that was the entrance to
Diagon Alley. The goblin clung even tighter as they
moved into the compressing darkness, and seconds
later Harry’s feet found pavement and he opened his
eyes on Charing Cross Road. Muggles bustled past
wearing the hangdog expressions of early morning,
quite unconscious of the little inn’s existence.
 
The bar of the Leaky Cauldron was nearly deserted.
Tom, the stooped and toothless landlord, was
polishing glasses behind the bar counter; a couple of
warlocks having a muttered conversation in the far
corner glanced at Hermione and drew back into the
shadows.
“Madam Lestrange,” murmured Tom, and as
Hermione passed he inclined his head subserviently.
“Good morning,” said Hermione, and as Harry crept
past, still carrying Griphook piggyback under the
Cloak, he saw Tom look surprised.
“Too polite,” Harry whispered in Hermione’s ear as
they passed out of the inn into the tiny backyard.
“You need to treat people like they’re scum!”
“Okay, okay!”
Hermione drew out Bellatrix’s wand and tapped a
brick in the nondescript wall in front of them. At once
the bricks began to whirl and spin: A hole appeared
in the middle of them, which grew wider and wider,
finally forming an archway onto the narrow cobbled
street that was Diagon Alley.
It was quiet, barely time for the shops to open, and
there were hardly any shoppers abroad. The crooked,
cobbled street was much altered now from the
bustling place Harry had visited before his first term
at Hogwarts so many years before. More shops than
ever were boarded up, though several new
establishments dedicated to the Dark Arts had been
created since his last visit. Harry’s own face glared
down at him from posters plastered over many
windows, always captioned with the words
UNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE.
 
A number of ragged people sat huddled in doorways.
He heard them moaning to the few passersby,
pleading for gold, insisting that they were really
wizards. One man had a bloody bandage over his eye.
As they set off along the street, the beggars glimpsed
Hermione. They seemed to melt away before her,
drawing hoods over their faces and fleeing as fast as
they could. Hermione looked after them curiously,
until the man with the bloodied bandage came
staggering right across her path.
“My children!” he bellowed, pointing at her. His voice
was cracked, high-pitched; he sounded distraught.
“Where are my children? What has he done with
them? You know, you know\”
“I — I really — ” stammered Hermione.
The man lunged at her, reaching for her throat: Then,
with a bang and a burst of red light he was thrown
backward onto the ground, unconscious. Ron stood
there, his wand still outstretched and a look of shock
visible behind his beard. Faces appeared at the
windows on either side of the street, while a little knot
of prosperous-looking passersby gathered their robes
about them and broke into gentle trots, keen to
vacate the scene.
Their entrance into Diagon Alley could hardly have
been more conspicuous; for a moment Harry
wondered whether it might not be better to leave now
and try to think of a different plan. Before they could
move or consult one another, however, they heard a
cry from behind them.
“Why, Madam Lestrange!”
 
Harry whirled around and Griphook tightened his
hold around Harry’s neck: A tall, thin wizard with a
crown of bushy gray hair and a long, sharp nose was
striding toward them.
“It’s Travers,” hissed the goblin into Harry’s ear, but
at that moment Harry could not think who Travers
was. Hermione had drawn herself up to her fullest
height and said with as much contempt as she could
muster:
“And what do you want?”
Travers stopped in his tracks, clearly affronted.
“ He’s another Death Eater\” breathed Griphook, and
Harry sidled sideways to repeat the information into
Hermione ’s ear.
“I merely sought to greet you,” said Travers coolly,
“but if my presence is not welcome ...”
Harry recognized his voice now; Travers was one of
the Death Eaters who had been summoned to
Xenophilius’s house.
“No, no, not at all, Travers,” said Hermione quickly,
trying to cover up her mistake. “How are you?”
“Well, I confess I am surprised to see you out and
about, Bellatrix.”
“Really? Why?” asked Hermione.
“Well,” Travers coughed, “I heard that the inhabitants
of Malfoy Manor were confined to the house, after the
... ah ... escape.”
 
Harry willed Hermione to keep her head. If this was
true, and Bellatrix was not supposed to be out in
public —
“The Dark Lord forgives those who have served him
most faithfully in the past,” said Hermione in a
magnificent imitation of Bellatrix’s most
contemptuous manner. “Perhaps your credit is not as
good with him as mine is, Travers.”
Though the Death Eater looked offended, he also
seemed less suspicious. He glanced down at the man
Ron had just Stunned.
“How did it offend you?”
“It does not matter, it will not do so again,” said
Hermione coolly.
“Some of these wandless can be troublesome,” said
Travers. “While they do nothing but beg I have no
objection, but one of them actually asked me to plead
her case at the Ministry last week. ‘I’m a witch, sir, I’m
a witch, let me prove it to youV ” he said in a squeaky
impersonation. “As if I was going to give her my wand
— but whose wand,” said Travers curiously, “are you
using at the moment, Bellatrix? I heard that your own
was — ”
“I have my wand here,” said Hermione coldly, holding
up Bellatrix’s wand. “I don’t know what rumors you
have been listening to, Travers, but you seem sadly
misinformed.”
Travers seemed a little taken aback at that, and he
turned instead to Ron.
“Who is your friend? I do not recognize him.”
 
“This is Dragomir Despard,” said Hermione; they had
decided that a fictional foreigner was the safest cover
for Ron to assume. “He speaks very little English, but
he is in sympathy with the Dark Lord’s aims. He has
traveled here from Transylvania to see our new
regime.”
“Indeed? How do you do, Dragomir?”
“ ’Ow you?” said Ron, holding out his hand.
Travers extended two fingers and shook Ron’s hand
as though frightened of dirtying himself.
“So what brings you and your — ah — sympathetic
friend to Diagon Alley this early?” asked Travers.
“I need to visit Gringotts,” said Hermione.
“Alas, I also,” said Travers. “Gold, filthy gold! We
cannot live without it, yet I confess I deplore the
necessity of consorting with our long-fingered
friends.”
Harry felt Griphook’s clasped hands tighten
momentarily around his neck.
“Shall we?” said Travers, gesturing Hermione forward.
Hermione had no choice but to fall into step beside
him and head along the crooked, cobbled street
toward the place where the snowy-white Gringotts
stood towering over the other little shops. Ron sloped
along beside them, and Harry and Griphook followed.
A watchful Death Eater was the very last thing they
needed, and the worst of it was, with Travers
marching at what he believed to be Bellatrix’s side,
there was no means for Harry to communicate with
 
Hermione or Ron. All too soon they arrived at the foot
of the marble steps leading up to the great bronze
doors. As Griphook had already warned them, the
liveried goblins who usually flanked the entrance had
been replaced by two wizards, both of whom were
clutching long thin golden rods.
“Ah, Probity Probes,” sighed Travers theatrically, “so
crude — but effective!”
And he set off up the steps, nodding left and right to
the wizards, who raised the golden rods and passed
them up and down his body. The Probes, Harry knew,
detected spells of concealment and hidden magical
objects. Knowing that he had only seconds; Harry
pointed Draco’s wand at each of the guards in turn
and murmured, “Confundo” twice. Unnoticed by
Travers, who was looking through the bronze doors at
the inner hall, each of the guards gave a little start as
the spells hit them.
Hermione ’s long black hair rippled behind her as she
climbed the steps.
“One moment, madam,” said the guard, raising his
Probe.
“But you’ve just done that!” said Hermione in
Bellatrix’s commanding, arrogant voice. Travers
looked around, eyebrows raised. The guard was
confused. He stared down at the thin golden Probe
and then at his companion, who said in a slightly
dazed voice,
“Yeah, you’ve just checked them, Marius.”
Hermione swept forward, Ron by her side, Harry and
Griphook trotting invisibly behind them. Harry
 
glanced back as they crossed the threshold: The
wizards were both scratching their heads.
Two goblins stood before the inner doors, which were
made of silver and which carried the poem warning of
dire retribution to potential thieves. Harry looked up
at it, and all of a sudden a knife-sharp memory came
to him: standing on this very spot on the day that he
had turned eleven, the most wonderful birthday of his
life, and Hagrid standing beside him saying, “ Like I
said, yeh’d be mad ter try an’ rob it.” Gringotts had
seemed a place of wonder that day, the enchanted
repository of a trove of gold he had never known he
possessed, and never for an instant could he have
dreamed that he would return to steal. ... But within
seconds they were standing in the vast marble hall of
the bank.
The long counter was manned by goblins sitting on
high stools, serving the first customers of the day.
Hermione, Ron, and Travers headed toward an old
goblin who was examining a thick gold coin through
an eyeglass. Hermione allowed Travers to step ahead
of her on the pretext of explaining features of the hall
to Ron.
The goblin tossed the coin he was holding aside, said
to nobody in particular, “Leprechaun,” and then
greeted Travers, who passed over a tiny golden key,
which was examined and given back to him.
Hermione stepped forward.
“Madam Lestrange!” said the goblin, evidently
startled. “Dear me! How — how may I help you
today?”
“I wish to enter my vault,” said Hermione.
 
The old goblin seemed to recoil a little. Harry glanced
around. Not only was Travers hanging back,
watching, but several other goblins had looked up
from their work to stare at Hermione.
“You have ... identification?” asked the goblin.
“Identification? I — I have never been asked for
identification before!” said Hermione.
“ They know\” whispered Griphook in Harry’s ear.
“They must have been warned there might be an
impostor !”
“Your wand will do, madam,” said the goblin. He held
out a slightly trembling hand, and in a dreadful blast
of realization Harry knew that the goblins of Gringotts
were aware that Bellatrix’s wand had been stolen.
“Act now, act now,” whispered Griphook in Harry’s
ear, “the Imperius Cursel”
Harry raised the hawthorn wand beneath the cloak,
pointed it at the old goblin, and whispered, for the
first time in his life, “Imperiol”
A curious sensation shot down Harry’s arm, a feeling
of tingling warmth that seemed to flow from his mind,
down the sinews and veins connecting him to the
wand and the curse it had just cast. The goblin took
Bellatrix’s wand, examined it closely, and then said,
“Ah, you have had a new wand made, Madam
Lestrange!”
“What?” said Hermione. “No, no, that’s mine — ”
“A new wand?” said Travers, approaching the counter
again; still the goblins all around were watching. “But
 
how could you have done, which wandmaker did you
use?”
Harry acted without thinking: Pointing his wand at
Travers, he muttered, “Imperiol” once more.
“Oh yes, I see,” said Travers, looking down at
Bellatrix’s wand, “yes, very handsome. And is it
working well? I always think wands require a little
breaking in, don’t you?”
Hermione looked utterly bewildered, but to Harry’s
enormous relief she accepted the bizarre turn of
events without comment.
The old goblin behind the counter clapped his hands
and a younger goblin approached.
“I shall need the Clankers,” he told the goblin, who
dashed away and returned a moment later with a
leather bag that seemed to be full of jangling metal,
which he handed to his senior. “Good, good! So, if you
will follow me, Madam Lestrange,” said the old goblin,
hopping down off his stool and vanishing from sight,
“I shall take you to your vault.”
He appeared around the end of the counter, jogging
happily toward them, the contents of the leather bag
still jingling. Travers was now standing quite still with
his mouth hanging wide open. Ron was drawing
attention to this odd phenomenon by regarding
Travers with confusion.
“Wait — Bogrod!”
Another goblin came scurrying around the counter.
 
“We have instructions,” he said with a bow to
Hermione. “Forgive me, Madam, but there have been
special orders regarding the vault of Lestrange.”
He whispered urgently in Bogrod’s ear, but the
Imperiused goblin shook him off.
“I am aware of the instructions. Madam Lestrange
wishes to visit her vault. ... Very old family ... old
clients ... This way, please ...”
And, still clanking, he hurried toward one of the many
doors leading off the hall. Harry looked back at
Travers, who was still rooted to the spot looking
abnormally vacant, and made his decision: With a
flick of his wand he made Travers come with them,
walking meekly in their wake as they reached the
door and passed into the rough stone passageway
beyond, which was lit with flaming torches.
“We’re in trouble; they suspect,” said Harry as the
door slammed behind them and he pulled off the
Invisibility Cloak. Griphook jumped down from his
shoulders; neither Travers nor Bogrod showed the
slightest surprise at the sudden appearance of Harry
Potter in their midst. “They’re Imperiused,” he added,
in response to Hermione and Ron’s confused queries
about Travers and Bogrod, who were both now
standing there looking blank. “I don’t think I did it
strongly enough, I don’t know. ...”
And another memory darted through his mind, of the
real Bellatrix Lestrange shrieking at him when he had
first tried to use an Unforgivable Curse: “You need to
mean them, Potter!”
“What do we do?” asked Ron. “Shall we get out now,
while we can?”
 
“If we can,” said Hermione, looking back toward the
door into the main hall, beyond which who knew
what was happening.
“We’ve got this far, I say we go on,” said Harry.
“Good!” said Griphook. “So, we need Bogrod to control
the cart; I no longer have the authority. But there will
not be room for the wizard.”
Harry pointed his wand at Travers.
“Imperio\”
The wizard turned and set off along the dark track at
a smart pace.
“What are you making him do?”
“Hide,” said Harry as he pointed his wand at Bogrod,
who whistled to summon a little cart that came
trundling along the tracks toward them out of the
darkness. Harry was sure he could hear shouting
behind them in the main hall as they all clambered
into it, Bogrod in front with Griphook, Harry, Ron,
and Hermione crammed together in the back.
With a jerk the cart moved off, gathering speed: They
hurtled past Travers, who was wriggling into a crack
in the wall, then the cart began twisting and turning
through the labyrinthine passages, sloping downward
all the time. Harry could not hear anything over the
rattling of the cart on the tracks: His hair flew behind
him as they swerved between stalactites, flying ever
deeper into the earth, but he kept glancing back.
They might as well have left enormous footprints
behind them; the more he thought about it, the more
foolish it seemed to have disguised Hermione as
 
Bellatrix, to have brought along Bellatrix’s wand,
when the Death Eaters knew who had stolen it —
They were deeper than Harry had ever penetrated
within Gringotts; they took a hairpin bend at speed
and saw ahead of them, with seconds to spare, a
waterfall pounding over the track. Harry heard
Griphook shout, “No!” but there was no braking: They
zoomed through it. Water filled Harry’s eyes and
mouth: He could not see or breathe: Then, with an
awful lurch, the cart flipped over and they were all
thrown out of it. Harry heard the cart smash into
pieces against the passage wall, heard Hermione
shriek something, and felt himself glide back toward
the ground as though weightless, landing painlessly
on the rocky passage floor.
“C-Cushioning Charm,” Hermione spluttered, as Ron
pulled her to her feet, but to Harry’s horror he saw
that she was no longer Bellatrix; instead she stood
there in overlarge robes, sopping wet and completely
herself; Ron was red-haired and beardless again.
They were realizing it as they looked at each other,
feeling their own faces.
“The Thief’s Downfall!” said Griphook, clambering to
his feet and looking back at the deluge onto the
tracks, which, Harry knew now, had been more than
water. “It washes away all enchantment, all magical
concealment! They know there are impostors in
Gringotts, they have set off defenses against us!”
Harry saw Hermione checking that she still had the
beaded bag, and hurriedly thrust his own hand under
his jacket to make sure he had not lost the Invisibility
Cloak. Then he turned to see Bogrod shaking his
head in bewilderment: The Thief’s Downfall seemed to
have lifted the Imperius Curse.
 
“We need him,” said Griphook, “we cannot enter the
vault without a Gringotts goblin. And we need the
Clankers!”
“Imperiol” Harry said again; his voice echoed through
the stone passage as he felt again the sense of heady
control that flowed from brain to wand. Bogrod
submitted once more to his will, his befuddled
expression changing to one of polite indifference, as
Ron hurried to pick up the leather bag of metal tools.
“Harry, I think I can hear people coming!” said
Hermione, and she pointed Bellatrix’s wand at the
waterfall and cried, “Protego\” They saw the Shield
Charm break the flow of enchanted water as it flew up
the passageway.
“Good thinking,” said Harry. “Lead the way,
Griphook!”
“How are we going to get out again?” Ron asked as
they hurried on foot into the darkness after the
goblin, Bogrod panting in their wake like an old dog.
“Let’s worry about that when we have to,” said Harry.
He was trying to listen: He thought he could hear
something clanking and moving around nearby.
“Griphook, how much farther?”
“Not far, Harry Potter, not far ...”
And they turned a corner and saw the thing for which
Harry had been prepared, but which still brought all
of them to a halt.
A gigantic dragon was tethered to the ground in front
of them, barring access to four or five of the deepest
vaults in the place. The beast’s scales had turned pale
and flaky during its long incarceration under the
 
ground; its eyes were milkily pink; both rear legs bore
heavy cuffs from which chains led to enormous pegs
driven deep into the rocky floor. Its great spiked
wings, folded close to its body, would have filled the
chamber if it spread them, and when it turned its
ugly head toward them, it roared with a noise that
made the rock tremble, opened its mouth, and spat a
jet of fire that sent them running back up the
passageway.
“It is partially blind,” panted Griphook, “but even
more savage for that. However, we have the means to
control it. It has learned what to expect when the
Clankers come. Give them to me.”
Ron passed the bag to Griphook, and the goblin
pulled out a number of small metal instruments that
when shaken made a loud, ringing noise like
miniature hammers on anvils. Griphook handed them
out: Bogrod accepted his meekly.
“You know what to do,” Griphook told Harry, Ron,
and Hermione. “It will expect pain when it hears the
noise: It will retreat, and Bogrod must place his palm
upon the door of the vault.”
They advanced around the corner again, shaking the
Clankers, and the noise echoed off the rocky walls,
grossly magnified, so that the inside of Harry’s skull
seemed to vibrate with the din. The dragon let out
another hoarse roar, then retreated. Harry could see
it trembling, and as they drew nearer he saw the
scars made by vicious slashes across its face, and
guessed that it had been taught to fear hot swords
when it heard the sound of the Clankers.
“Make him press his hand to the door!” Griphook
urged Harry, who turned his wand again upon
Bogrod. The old goblin obeyed, pressing his palm to
 
the wood, and the door of the vault melted away to
reveal a cavelike opening crammed from floor to
ceiling with golden coins and goblets, silver armor,
the skins of strange creatures — some with long
spines, others with drooping wings — potions in
jeweled flasks, and a skull still wearing a crown.
“Search, fast!” said Harry as they all hurried inside
the vault.
He had described Hufflepuff’s cup to Ron and
Hermione, but if it was the other, unknown Horcrux
that resided in this vault, he did not know what it
looked like. He barely had time to glance around,
however, before there was a muffled clunk from
behind them: The door had reappeared, sealing them
inside the vault, and they were plunged into total
darkness.
“No matter, Bogrod will be able to release us!” said
Griphook as Ron gave a shout of surprise. “Light your
wands, can’t you? And hurry, we have very little
time!”
“Lumosl”
Harry shone his lit wand around the vault: Its beam
fell upon glittering jewels; he saw the fake sword of
Gryffindor lying on a high shelf amongst a jumble of
chains. Ron and Hermione had lit their wands too,
and were now examining the piles of objects
surrounding them.
“Harry, could this be — ? Aargh!”
Hermione screamed in pain, and Harry turned his
wand on her in time to see a jeweled goblet tumbling
from her grip. But as it fell, it split, became a shower
of goblets, so that a second later, with a great clatter,
 
the floor was covered in identical cups rolling in every
direction, the original impossible to discern amongst
them.
“It burned me!” moaned Hermione, sucking her
blistered fingers.
“They have added Gemino and Flagrante Curses!”
said Griphook. “Everything you touch will burn and
multiply, but the copies are worthless — and if you
continue to handle the treasure, you will eventually
be crushed to death by the weight of expanding gold!”
“Okay, don’t touch anything!” said Harry desperately,
but even as he said it, Ron accidentally nudged one of
the fallen goblets with his foot, and twenty more
exploded into being while Ron hopped on the spot,
part of his shoe burned away by contact with the hot
metal.
“Stand still, don’t move!” said Hermione, clutching at
Ron.
“Just look around!” said Harry. “Remember, the cup’s
small and gold, it’s got a badger engraved on it, two
handles — otherwise see if you can spot Ravenclaw’s
symbol anywhere, the eagle — ”
They directed their wands into every nook and
crevice, turning cautiously on the spot. It was
impossible not to brush up against anything; Harry
sent a great cascade of fake Galleons onto the ground
where they joined the goblets, and now there was
scarcely room to place their feet, and the glowing gold
blazed with heat, so that the vault felt like a furnace.
Harry’s wandlight passed over shields and goblin-
made helmets set on shelves rising to the ceiling;
higher and higher he raised the beam, until suddenly
 
it found an object that made his heart skip and his
hand tremble.
“It’s there, it’s up there\”
Ron and Hermione pointed their wands at it too, so
that the little golden cup sparkled in a three-way
spotlight: the cup that had belonged to Helga
Hufflepuff, which had passed into the possession of
Hepzibah Smith, from whom it had been stolen by
Tom Riddle.
“And how the hell are we going to get up there
without touching anything?” asked Ron.
“Accio Cup\” cried Hermione, who had evidently
forgotten in her desperation what Griphook had told
them during their planning sessions.
“No use, no use!” snarled the goblin.
“Then what do we do?” said Harry, glaring at the
goblin. “If you want the sword, Griphook, then you’ll
have to help us more than — wait! Can I touch stuff
with the sword? Hermione, give it here!”
Hermione fumbled inside her robes, drew out the
beaded bag, rummaged for a few seconds, then
removed the shining sword. Harry seized it by its
rubied hilt and touched the tip of the blade to a silver
flagon nearby, which did not multiply.
“If I can just poke the sword through a handle — but
how am I going to get up there?”
The shelf on which the cup reposed was out of reach
for any of them, even Ron, who was tallest. The heat
from the enchanted treasure rose in waves, and sweat
ran down Harry’s face and back as he struggled to
 
think of a way up to the cup; and then he heard the
dragon roar on the other side of the vault door, and
the sound of clanking growing louder and louder.
They were truly trapped now: There was no way out
except through the door, and a horde of goblins
seemed to be approaching on the other side. Harry
looked at Ron and Hermione and saw terror in their
faces.
“Hermione,” said Harry as the clanking grew louder,
“I’ve got to get up there, we’ve got to get rid of it — ”
She raised her wand, pointed it at Harry, and
whispered, “Levicorpus.”
Hoisted into the air by his ankle, Harry hit a suit of
armor and replicas burst out of it like white-hot
bodies, filling the cramped space. With screams of
pain Ron, Hermione, and the two goblins were
knocked aside into other objects, which also began to
replicate. Half buried in a rising tide of red-hot
treasure, they struggled and yelled as Harry thrust
the sword through the handle of Hufflepuff’s cup,
hooking it onto the blade.
“Impervius\” screeched Hermione in an attempt to
protect herself, Ron, and the goblins from the burning
metal.
Then the worst scream yet made Harry look down:
Ron and Hermione were waist-deep in treasure,
struggling to keep Bogrod from slipping beneath the
rising tide, but Griphook had sunk out of sight and
nothing but the tips of a few long fingers were left in
view.
Harry seized Griphook’s fingers and pulled. The
blistered goblin emerged by degrees, howling.
 
“Liberacorpus\” yelled Harry, and with a crash he and
Griphook landed on the surface of the swelling
treasure, and the sword flew out of Harry’s hand.
“Get it!” Harry yelled, fighting the pain of the hot
metal on his skin, as Griphook clambered onto his
shoulders again, determined to avoid the swelling
mass of red-hot objects. “Where’s the sword? It had
the cup on it!”
The clanking on the other side of the door was
growing deafening — it was too late —
“There!”
It was Griphook who had seen it and Griphook who
lunged, and in that instant Harry knew that the
goblin had never expected them to keep their word.
One hand holding tightly to a fistful of Harry’s hair, to
make sure he did not fall into the heaving sea of
burning gold, Griphook seized the hilt of the sword
and swung it high out of Harry’s reach.
The tiny golden cup, skewered by the handle on the
sword’s blade, was flung into the air. The goblin still
astride him, Harry dived and caught it, and although
he could feel it scalding his flesh he did not relinquish
it, even while countless Hufflepuff cups burst from
his fist, raining down upon him as the entrance of the
vault opened up again and he found himself sliding
uncontrollably on an expanding avalanche of fiery
gold and silver that bore him, Ron, and Hermione into
the outer chamber.
Hardly aware of the pain from the burns covering his
body, and still borne along on the swell of replicating
treasure, Harry shoved the cup into his pocket and
reached up to retrieve the sword, but Griphook was
gone. Sliding from Harry’s shoulders the moment he
 
could, he had sprinted for cover amongst the
surrounding goblins, brandishing the sword and
crying, “Thieves! Thieves! Help! Thieves!” He vanished
into the midst of the advancing crowd, all of whom
were holding daggers and who accepted him without
question.
Slipping on the hot metal, Harry struggled to his feet
and knew that the only way out was through.
“Stupefyl” he bellowed, and Ron and Hermione joined
in: Jets of red light flew into the crowd of goblins, and
some toppled over, but others advanced, and Harry
saw several wizard guards running around the
corner.
The tethered dragon let out a roar, and a gush of
flame flew over the goblins: The wizards fled, doubled-
up, back the way they had come, and inspiration, or
madness, came to Harry. Pointing his wand at the
thick cuffs chaining the beast to the floor, he yelled,
“Relashiol”
The cuffs broke open with loud bangs.
“This way!” Harry yelled, and still shooting Stunning
Spells at the advancing goblins, he sprinted toward
the blind dragon.
“Harry — Harry — what are you doing?” cried
Hermione.
“Get up, climb up, come on — ”
The dragon had not realized that it was free: Harry’s
foot found the crook of its hind leg and he pulled
himself up onto its back. The scales were hard as
steel; it did not even seem to feel him. He stretched
out an arm; Hermione hoisted herself up; Ron
 
climbed on behind them, and a second later the
dragon became aware that it was untethered.
With a roar it reared: Harry dug in his knees,
clutching as tightly as he could to the jagged scales
as the wings opened, knocking the shrieking goblins
aside like skittles, and it soared into the air. Harry,
Ron, and Hermione, flat on its back, scraped against
the ceiling as it dived toward the passage opening,
while the pursuing goblins hurled daggers that
glanced off its flanks.
“Well never get out, it’s too big!” Hermione screamed,
but the dragon opened its mouth and belched flame
again, blasting the tunnel, whose floors and ceiling
cracked and crumbled. By sheer force the dragon
clawed and fought its way through. Harry’s eyes were
shut tight against the heat and dust: Deafened by the
crashing of rock and the dragon’s roars, he could only
cling to its back, expecting to be shaken off at any
moment; then he heard Hermione yelling, “Defodiol”
She was helping the dragon enlarge the passageway,
carving out the ceiling as it struggled upward toward
the fresher air, away from the shrieking and clanking
goblins: Harry and Ron copied her, blasting the
ceiling apart with more gouging spells. They passed
the underground lake, and the great crawling,
snarling beast seemed to sense freedom and space
ahead of it, and behind them the passage was full of
the dragon’s thrashing, spiked tail, of great lumps of
rock, gigantic fractured stalactites, and the clanking
of the goblins seemed to be growing more muffled,
while ahead, the dragon’s fire kept their progress
clear —
And then at last, by the combined force of their spells
and the dragon’s brute strength, they had blasted
their way out of the passage into the marble hallway.
 
Goblins and wizards shrieked and ran for cover, and
finally the dragon had room to stretch its wings:
Turning its horned head toward the cool outside air it
could smell beyond the entrance, it took off, and with
Harry, Ron, and Hermione still clinging to its back, it
forced its way through the metal doors, leaving them
buckled and hanging from their hinges, as it
staggered into Diagon Alley and launched itself into
the sky.
 
THE FINAL HIDING PLACE
There was no means of steering; the dragon could not
see where it was going, and Harry knew that if it
turned sharply or rolled in midair they would find it
impossible to cling onto its broad back. Nevertheless,
as they climbed higher and higher, London unfurling
below them like a gray-and-green map, Harry’s
overwhelming feeling was of gratitude for an escape
that had seemed impossible. Crouching low over the
beast’s neck, he clung tight to the metallic scales, and
the cool breeze was soothing on his burned and
blistered skin, the dragon’s wings beating the air like
the sails of a windmill. Behind him, whether from
delight or fear he could not tell, Ron kept swearing at
the top of his voice, and Hermione seemed to be
sobbing.
After five minutes or so, Harry lost some of his
immediate dread that the dragon was going to throw
them off, for it seemed intent on nothing but getting
as far away from its underground prison as possible;
but the question of how and when they were to
dismount remained rather frightening. He had no idea
 
how long dragons could fly without landing, nor how
this particular dragon, which could barely see, would
locate a good place to put down. He glanced around
constantly, imagining that he could feel his scar
prickling. ...
How long would it be before Voldemort knew that they
had broken into the Lestranges’ vault? How soon
would the goblins of Gringotts notify Bellatrix? How
quickly would they realize what had been taken? And
then, when they discovered that the golden cup was
missing? Voldemort would know, at last, that they
were hunting Horcruxes. ...
The dragon seemed to crave cooler and fresher air: It
climbed steadily until they were flying through wisps
of chilly cloud, and Harry could no longer make out
the little colored dots which were cars pouring in and
out of the capital. On and on they flew, over
countryside parceled out in patches of green and
brown, over roads and rivers winding through the
landscape like strips of matte and glossy ribbon.
“What do you reckon it’s looking for?” Ron yelled as
they flew farther and farther north.
“No idea,” Harry bellowed back. His hands were numb
with cold but he did not dare attempt to shift his grip.
He had been wondering for some time what they
would do if they saw the coast sail beneath them, if
the dragon headed for open sea; he was cold and
numb, not to mention desperately hungry and thirsty.
When, he wondered, had the beast itself last eaten?
Surely it would need sustenance before long? And
what if, at that point, it realized it had three highly
edible humans sitting on its back?
The sun slipped lower in the sky, which was turning
indigo; and still the dragon flew, cities and towns
 
gliding out of sight beneath them, its enormous
shadow sliding over the earth like a great dark cloud.
Every part of Harry ached with the effort of holding on
to the dragon’s back.
“Is it my imagination,” shouted Ron after a
considerable stretch of silence, “or are we losing
height?”
Harry looked down and saw deep green mountains
and lakes, coppery in the sunset. The landscape
seemed to grow larger and more detailed as he
squinted over the side of the dragon, and he
wondered whether it had divined the presence of fresh
water by the flashes of reflected sunlight.
Lower and lower the dragon flew, in great spiraling
circles, honing in, it seemed, upon one of the smaller
lakes.
“I say we jump when it gets low enough!” Harry called
back to the others. “Straight into the water before it
realizes we’re here!”
They agreed, Hermione a little faintly, and now Harry
could see the dragon’s wide yellow underbelly rippling
in the surface of the water.
“NOW!”
He slithered over the side of the dragon and
plummeted feetfirst toward the surface of the lake;
the drop was greater than he had estimated and he
hit the water hard, plunging like a stone into a
freezing, green, reed-filled world. He kicked toward
the surface and emerged, panting, to see enormous
ripples emanating in circles from the places where
Ron and Hermione had fallen. The dragon did not
seem to have noticed anything: It was already fifty
 
feet away, swooping low over the lake to scoop up
water in its scarred snout. As Ron and Hermione
emerged, spluttering and gasping, from the depths of
the lake, the dragon flew on, its wings beating hard,
and landed at last on a distant bank.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione struck out for the opposite
shore. The lake did not seem to be deep: Soon it was
more a question of fighting their way through reeds
and mud than swimming, and at last they flopped,
sodden, panting, and exhausted, onto slippery grass.
Hermione collapsed, coughing and shuddering.
Though Harry could have happily lain down and
slept, he staggered to his feet, drew out his wand, and
started casting the usual protective spells around
them.
When he had finished, he joined the others. It was the
first time that he had seen them properly since
escaping from the vault. Both had angry red burns all
over their faces and arms, and their clothing was
singed away in places. They were wincing as they
dabbed essence of dittany onto their many injuries.
Hermione handed Harry the bottle, then pulled out
three bottles of pumpkin juice she had brought from
Shell Cottage and clean, dry robes for all of them.
They changed and then gulped down the juice.
“Well, on the upside,” said Ron finally, who was
sitting watching the skin on his hands regrow, “we got
the Horcrux. On the downside — ”
“ — no sword,” said Harry through gritted teeth, as he
dripped dittany through the singed hole in his jeans
onto the angry burn beneath.
“No sword,” repeated Ron. “That double-crossing little
scab ...”
 
Harry pulled the Horcrux from the pocket of the wet
jacket he had just taken off and set it down on the
grass in front of them. Glinting in the sun, it drew
their eyes as they swigged their bottles of juice.
“At least we can’t wear it this time, that’d look a bit
weird hanging round our necks,” said Ron, wiping his
mouth on the back of his hand.
Hermione looked across the lake to the far bank,
where the dragon was still drinking.
“What’ll happen to it, do you think?” she asked. “Will
it be all right?”
“You sound like Hagrid,” said Ron. “It’s a dragon,
Hermione, it can look after itself. It’s us we need to
worry about.”
“What do you mean?”
“Well, I don’t know how to break this to you,” said
Ron, “but I think they might have noticed we broke
into Gringotts.”
All three of them started to laugh, and once started, it
was difficult to stop. Harry’s ribs ached, he felt
lightheaded with hunger, but he lay back on the grass
beneath the reddening sky and laughed until his
throat was raw.
“What are we going to do, though?” said Hermione
finally, hiccuping herself back to seriousness. “He’ll
know, won’t he? You- Know- Who will know we know
about his Horcruxes!”
“Maybe they’ll be too scared to tell him?” said Ron
hopefully. “Maybe they’ll cover up — ”
 
The sky, the smell of lake water, the sound of Ron’s
voice were extinguished: Pain cleaved Harry’s head
like a sword stroke. He was standing in a dimly lit
room, and a semicircle of wizards faced him, and on
the floor at his feet knelt a small, quaking figure.
“What did you say to me?” His voice was high and
cold, but fury and fear burned inside him. The one
thing he had dreaded — but it could not be true, he
could not see how ...
The goblin was trembling, unable to meet the red eyes
high above his.
“Say it again!” murmured Voldemort. “ Say it again).”
“M-my Lord,” stammered the goblin, its black eyes
wide with terror, “m-my Lord ... we t-tried t-to st-stop
them. ... Im-impostors, my Lord ... broke — broke
into the — into the Lestranges’ v-vault. ...”
“Impostors? What impostors? I thought Gringotts had
ways of revealing impostors? Who were they?”
“It was ... it was . . . the P-Potter b-boy and t-two
accomplices. ...”
“And they took?” he said, his voice rising, a terrible
fear gripping him. “Tell me! What did they take?”
“A ... a s-small golden c-cup, m-my Lord ...”
The scream of rage, of denial left him as if it were a
stranger’s: He was crazed, frenzied, it could not be
true, it was impossible, nobody had ever known: How
was it possible that the boy could have discovered his
secret?
 
The Elder Wand slashed through the air and green
light erupted through the room; the kneeling goblin
rolled over, dead; the watching wizards scattered
before him, terrified: Bellatrix and Lucius Malfoy
threw others behind them in their race for the door,
and again and again his wand fell, and those who
were left were slain, all of them, for bringing him this
news, for hearing about the golden cup —
Alone amongst the dead he stormed up and down,
and they passed before him in vision: his treasures,
his safeguards, his anchors to immortality — the
diary was destroyed and the cup was stolen: What if,
what if, the boy knew about the others? Could he
know, had he already acted, had he traced more of
them? Was Dumbledore at the root of this?
Dumbledore, who had always suspected him;
Dumbledore, dead on his orders; Dumbledore, whose
wand was his now, yet who reached out from the
ignominy of death through the boy, the boy —
But surely if the boy had destroyed any of his
Horcruxes, he, Lord Voldemort, would have known,
would have felt it? He, the greatest wizard of them all;
he, the most powerful; he, the killer of Dumbledore
and of how many other worthless, nameless men:
How could Lord Voldemort not have known, if he,
himself, most important and precious, had been
attacked, mutilated?
True, he had not felt it when the diary had been
destroyed, but he had thought that was because he
had no body to feel, being less than ghost. ... No,
surely, the rest were safe. ... The other Horcruxes
must be intact. ...
But he must know, he must be sure. ... He paced the
room, kicking aside the goblin’s corpse as he passed,
 
and the pictures blurred and burned in his boiling
brain: the lake, the shack, and Hogwarts —
A modicum of calm cooled his rage now: How could
the boy know that he had hidden the ring in the
Gaunt shack? No one had ever known him to be
related to the Gaunts, he had hidden the connection,
the killings had never been traced to him: The ring,
surely, was safe.
And how could the boy, or anybody else, know about
the cave or penetrate its protection? The idea of the
locket being stolen was absurd. ...
As for the school: He alone knew where in Hogwarts
he had stowed the Horcrux, because he alone had
plumbed the deepest secrets of that place. ...
And there was still Nagini, who must remain close
now, no longer sent to do his bidding, under his
protection. ...
But to be sure, to be utterly sure, he must return to
each of his hiding places, he must redouble protection
around each of his Horcruxes. ... A job, like the quest
for the Elder Wand, that he must undertake alone ...
Which should he visit first, which was in most
danger? An old unease flickered inside him.
Dumbledore had known his middle name. ...
Dumbledore might have made the connection with
the Gaunts. ... Their abandoned home was, perhaps,
the least secure of his hiding places, it was there that
he would go first. ...
The lake, surely impossible ... though was there a
slight possibility that Dumbledore might have known
some of his past misdeeds, through the orphanage.
 
And Hogwarts . . . but he knew that his Horcrux there
was safe; it would be impossible for Potter to enter
Hogsmeade without detection, let alone the school.
Nevertheless, it would be prudent to alert Snape to
the fact that the boy might try to reenter the castle. ...
To tell Snape why the boy might return would be
foolish, of course; it had been a grave mistake to trust
Bellatrix and Malfoy: Didn’t their stupidity and
carelessness prove how unwise it was ever to trust?
He would visit the Gaunt shack first, then, and take
Nagini with him: He would not be parted from the
snake anymore . . . and he strode from the room,
through the hall, and out into the dark garden where
the fountain played; he called the snake in
Parseltongue and it slithered out to join him like a
long shadow. ...
Harry’s eyes flew open as he wrenched himself back
to the present: He was lying on the bank of the lake in
the setting sun, and Ron and Hermione were looking
down at him. Judging by their worried looks, and by
the continued pounding of his scar, his sudden
excursion into Voldemort’s mind had not passed
unnoticed. He struggled up, shivering, vaguely
surprised that he was still wet to his skin, and saw
the cup lying innocently in the grass before him, and
the lake, deep blue shot with gold in the failing sun.
“He knows.” His own voice sounded strange and low
after Voldemort’s high screams. “He knows, and he’s
going to check where the others are, and the last
one,” he was already on his feet, “is at Hogwarts. I
knew it. I knew it.”
“What?”
Ron was gaping at him; Hermione sat up, looking
worried.
 
“But what did you see? How do you know?”
“I saw him find out about the cup, I — I was in his
head, he’s” — Harry remembered the killings — “he’s
seriously angry, and scared too, he can’t understand
how we knew, and now he’s going to check the others
are safe, the ring first. He thinks the Hogwarts one is
safest, because Snape’s there, because it’ll be so hard
not to be seen getting in, I think he’ll check that one
last, but he could still be there within hours — ”
“Did you see where in Hogwarts it is?” asked Ron,
now scrambling to his feet too.
“No, he was concentrating on warning Snape, he
didn’t think about exactly where it is — ”
“Wait, wait\” cried Hermione as Ron caught up the
Horcrux and Harry pulled out the Invisibility Cloak
again. “We can’t just go, we haven’t got a plan, we
need to — ”
“We need to get going,” said Harry firmly. He had
been hoping to sleep, looking forward to getting into
the new tent, but that was impossible now. “Can you
imagine what he’s going to do once he realizes the
ring and the locket are gone? What if he moves the
Hogwarts Horcrux, decides it isn’t safe enough?”
“But how are we going to get in?”
“Well go to Hogsmeade,” said Harry, “and try to work
something out once we see what the protection
around the school’s like. Get under the Cloak,
Hermione, I want to stick together this time.”
“But we don’t really fit — ”
“It’ll be dark, no one’s going to notice our feet.”
 
The flapping of enormous wings echoed across the
black water: The dragon had drunk its fill and risen
into the air. They paused in their preparations to
watch it climb higher and higher, now black against
the rapidly darkening sky, until it vanished over a
nearby mountain. Then Hermione walked forward
and took her place between the other two. Harry
pulled the Cloak down as far as it would go, and
together they turned on the spot into the crushing
darkness.
 
THE MISSING MIRROR
Harry’s feet touched road. He saw the achingly
familiar Hogsmeade High Street: dark shop fronts,
and the outline of black mountains beyond the
village, and the curve in the road ahead that led off
toward Hogwarts, and light spilling from the windows
of the Three Broomsticks, and with a lurch of the
heart he remembered, with piercing accuracy, how he
had landed here nearly a year before, supporting a
desperately weak Dumbledore; all this in a second,
upon landing — and then, even as he relaxed his grip
upon Ron’s and Hermione’s arms, it happened.
The air was rent by a scream that sounded like
Voldemort’s when he had realized the cup had been
stolen: It tore at every nerve in Harry’s body, and he
knew immediately that their appearance had caused
it. Even as he looked at the other two beneath the
Cloak, the door of the Three Broomsticks burst open
and a dozen cloaked and hooded Death Eaters
dashed into the street, their wands aloft.
 
Harry seized Ron’s wrist as he raised his wand; there
were too many of them to Stun: Even attempting it
would give away their position. One of the Death
Eaters waved his wand and the scream stopped, still
echoing around the distant mountains.
“Accio Cloak).” roared one of the Death Eaters.
Harry seized its folds, but it made no attempt to
escape: The Summoning Charm had not worked on it.
“Not under your wrapper, then, Potter?” yelled the
Death Eater who had tried the charm, and then to his
fellows, “Spread out. He’s here.”
Six of the Death Eaters ran toward them: Harry, Ron,
and Hermione backed as quickly as possible down the
nearest side street, and the Death Eaters missed
them by inches. They waited in the darkness,
listening to the footsteps running up and down,
beams of light flying along the street from the Death
Eaters’ searching wands.
“Let’s just leave!” Hermione whispered. “Disapparate
now!”
“Great idea,” said Ron, but before Harry could reply a
Death Eater shouted,
“We know you’re here, Potter, and there’s no getting
away! We’ll find you!”
“They were ready for us,” whispered Harry. “They set
up that spell to tell them we’d come. I reckon they’ve
done something to keep us here, trap us — ”
“What about dementors?” called another Death Eater.
“Let ’em have free rein, they’d find him quick enough!”
 
“The Dark Lord wants Potter dead by no hand but his
“ — an’ dementors won’t kill him! The Dark Lord
wants Potter’s life, not his soul. He’ll be easier to kill if
he’s been Kissed first!”
There were noises of agreement. Dread filled Harry:
To repel dementors they would have to produce
Patronuses, which would give them away
immediately.
“We’re going to have to try to Disapparate, Harry!”
Hermione whispered.
Even as she said it, he felt the unnatural cold begin to
steal over the street. Light was sucked from the
environment right up to the stars, which vanished. In
the pitch-blackness, he felt Hermione take hold of his
arm and together, they turned on the spot.
The air through which they needed to move seemed to
have become solid: They could not Disapparate; the
Death Eaters had cast their charms well. The cold
was biting deeper and deeper into Harry’s flesh. He,
Ron, and Hermione retreated down the side street,
groping their way along the wall, trying not to make a
sound. Then, around the corner, gliding noiselessly,
came dementors, ten or more of them, visible because
they were of a denser darkness than their
surroundings, with their black cloaks and their
scabbed and rotting hands. Could they sense fear in
the vicinity? Harry was sure of it: They seemed to be
coming more quickly now, taking those dragging,
rattling breaths he detested, tasting despair on the
air, closing in —
He raised his wand: He could not, would not, suffer
the Dementor’s Kiss, whatever happened afterward. It
 
was of Ron and Hermione that he thought as he
whispered, “Expecto Patronum).”
The silver stag burst from his wand and charged: The
dementors scattered and there was a triumphant yell
from somewhere out of sight.
“It’s him, down there, down there, I saw his Patronus,
it was a stag!
The dementors had retreated, the stars were popping
out again, and the footsteps of the Death Eaters were
becoming louder; but before Harry in his panic could
decide what to do, there was a grinding of bolts
nearby, a door opened on the left-hand side of the
narrow street, and a rough voice said, “Potter, in here,
quick!”
He obeyed without hesitation: The three of them
hurtled through the open doorway.
“Upstairs, keep the Cloak on, keep quiet!” muttered a
tall figure, passing them on his way into the street
and slamming the door behind him.
Harry had had no idea where they were, but now he
saw, by the stuttering light of a single candle, the
grubby, sawdust- strewn bar of the Hog’s Head Inn.
They ran behind the counter and through a second
doorway, which led to a rickety wooden staircase that
they climbed as fast as they could. The stairs opened
onto a sitting room with a threadbare carpet and a
small fireplace, above which hung a single large oil
painting of a blonde girl who gazed out at the room
with a kind of vacant sweetness.
Shouts reached them from the street below. Still
wearing the Invisibility Cloak, they crept toward the
grimy window and looked down. Their savior, whom
 
Harry now recognized as the Hog’s Head’s barman,
was the only person not wearing a hood.
“So what?” he was bellowing into one of the hooded
faces. “So what? You send dementors down my street,
I’ll send a Patronus back at ’em! I’m not having ’em
near me, I’ve told you that, I’m not having it!”
“That wasn’t your Patronus!” said a Death Eater.
“That was a stag, it was Potter’s!”
“Stag!” roared the barman, and he pulled out a wand.
“Stag! You idiot — Expecto Patronum .!”
Something huge and horned erupted from the wand:
Head down, it charged toward the High Street and out
of sight.
“That’s not what I saw — ” said the Death Eater,
though with less certainty.
“Curfew’s been broken, you heard the noise,” one of
his companions told the barman. “Someone was out
in the street against regulations — ”
“If I want to put my cat out, I will, and be damned to
your curfew!”
“ You set off the Caterwauling Charm?”
“What if I did? Going to cart me off to Azkaban? Kill
me for sticking my nose out my own front door? Do it,
then, if you want to! But I hope for your sakes you
haven’t pressed your little Dark Marks and
summoned him. He’s not going to like being called
here for me and my old cat, is he, now?”
“Don’t you worry about us,” said one of the Death
Eaters, “worry about yourself, breaking curfew!”
 
“And where will you lot traffick potions and poisons
when my pub’s closed down? What’ll happen to your
little sidelines then?”
“Are you threatening — ?”
“I keep my mouth shut, it’s why you come here, isn’t
it?”
“I still say I saw a stag Patronus!” shouted the first
Death Eater.
“Stag?” roared the barman. “It’s a goat, idiot!”
“All right, we made a mistake,” said the second Death
Eater. “Break curfew again and we won’t be so
lenient!”
The Death Eaters strode back toward the High Street.
Hermione moaned with relief, wove out from under
the Cloak, and sat down on a wobble-legged chair.
Harry drew the curtains tight shut, then pulled the
Cloak off himself and Ron. They could hear the
barman down below, rebolting the door of the bar,
then climbing the stairs.
Harry’s attention was caught by something on the
mantelpiece: a small, rectangular mirror propped on
top of it, right beneath the portrait of the girl.
The barman entered the room.
“You bloody fools,” he said gruffly, looking from one to
the other of them. “What were you thinking, coming
here?”
“Thank you,” said Harry. “We can’t thank you
enough. You saved our lives.”
 
The barman grunted. Harry approached him, looking
up into the face, trying to see past the long, stringy,
wire-gray hair and beard. He wore spectacles. Behind
the dirty lenses, the eyes were a piercing, brilliant
blue.
“It’s your eye I’ve been seeing in the mirror.”
There was silence in the room. Harry and the barman
looked at each other.
“You sent Dobby.”
The barman nodded and looked around for the elf.
“Thought he’d be with you. Where Ve you left him?”
“He’s dead,” said Harry. “Bellatrix Lestrange killed
him.”
The barman’s face was impassive. After a few
moments he said, “I’m sorry to hear it. I liked that
elf.”
He turned away, lighting lamps with prods of his
wand, not looking at any of them.
“You’re Aberforth,” said Harry to the man’s back.
He neither confirmed nor denied it, but bent to light
the fire.
“How did you get this?” Harry asked, walking across
to Sirius’s mirror, the twin of the one he had broken
nearly two years before. “Bought it from Dung ’bout a
year ago,” said Aberforth. “Albus told me what it was.
Been trying to keep an eye out for you.”
Ron gasped.
 
“The silver doe!” he said excitedly. “Was that you too?”
“What are you talking about?” said Aberforth.
“Someone sent a doe Patronus to us!”
“Brains like that, you could be a Death Eater, son.
Haven’t I just proved my Patronus is a goat?”
“Oh,” said Ron. “Yeah ... well, I’m hungry!” he added
defensively as his stomach gave an enormous rumble.
“I got food,” said Aberforth, and he sloped out of the
room, reappearing moments later with a large loaf of
bread, some cheese, and a pewter jug of mead, which
he set upon a small table in front of the fire.
Ravenous, they ate and drank, and for a while there
was silence but for the crackle of the fire, the clink of
goblets, and the sound of chewing.
“Right then,” said Aberforth when they had eaten
their fill, and Harry and Ron sat slumped dozily in
their chairs. “We need to think of the best way to get
you out of here. Can’t be done by night, you heard
what happens if anyone moves outdoors during
darkness: Caterwauling Charm’s set off, they’ll be
onto you like bow-truckles on doxy eggs. I don’t
reckon I’ll be able to pass off a stag as a goat a second
time. Wait for daybreak when curfew lifts, then you
can put your Cloak back on and set out on foot. Get
right out of Hogsmeade, up into the mountains, and
you’ll be able to Disapparate there. Might see Hagrid.
He’s been hiding in a cave up there with Grawp ever
since they tried to arrest him.”
“We’re not leaving,” said Harry. “We need to get into
Hogwarts.”
“Don’t be stupid, boy,” said Aberforth.
 
“We’ve got to,” said Harry.
“What you’ve got to do,” said Aberforth, leaning
forward, “is to get as far from here as you can.”
“You don’t understand. There isn’t much time. We’ve
got to get into the castle. Dumbledore — I mean, your
brother — wanted us — ”
The firelight made the grimy lenses of Aberforth ’s
glasses momentarily opaque, a bright flat white, and
Harry remembered the blind eyes of the giant spider,
Aragog.
“My brother Albus wanted a lot of things,” said
Aberforth, “and people had a habit of getting hurt
while he was carrying out his grand plans. You get
away from this school, Potter, and out of the country
if you can. Forget my brother and his clever schemes.
He’s gone where none of this can hurt him, and you
don’t owe him anything.”
“You don’t understand,” said Harry again.
“Oh, don’t I?” said Aberforth quietly. “You don’t think
I understood my own brother? Think you knew Albus
better than I did?”
“I didn’t mean that,” said Harry, whose brain felt
sluggish with exhaustion and from the surfeit of food
and wine. “It’s ... he left me a job.”
“Did he now?” said Aberforth. “Nice job, I hope?
Pleasant? Easy? Sort of thing you’d expect an
unqualified wizard kid to be able to do without
overstretching themselves?”
Ron gave a rather grim laugh. Hermione was looking
strained.
 
“I-it’s not easy, no,” said Harry. “But I’ve got to — ”
“ ‘Got to’? Why ‘got to*? He’s dead, isn’t he?” said
Aberforth roughly. “Let it go, boy, before you follow
him! Save yourself!”
“I can’t.”
“Why not?”
“I — ” Harry felt overwhelmed; he could not explain, so
he took the offensive instead. “But you’re fighting too,
you’re in the Order of the Phoenix — ”
“I was,” said Aberforth. “The Order of the Phoenix is
finished. You-Know-Who’s won, it’s over, and anyone
who’s pretending different’s kidding themselves. It’ll
never be safe for you here, Potter, he wants you too
badly. So go abroad, go into hiding, save yourself.
Best take these two with you.” He jerked a thumb at
Ron and Hermione. “They’ll be in danger long as they
live now everyone knows they’ve been working with
you.”
“I can’t leave,” said Harry. “I’ve got a job — ”
“Give it to someone else!”
“I can’t. It’s got to be me, Dumbledore explained it all
“Oh, did he now? And did he tell you everything, was
he honest with you?”
Harry wanted with all his heart to say “Yes,” but
somehow the simple word would not rise to his lips.
Aberforth seemed to know what he was thinking.
 
“I knew my brother, Potter. He learned secrecy at our
mother’s knee. Secrets and lies, that’s how we grew
up, and Albus ... he was a natural.”
The old man’s eyes traveled to the painting of the girl
over the mantelpiece. It was, now Harry looked
around properly, the only picture in the room. There
was no photograph of Albus Dumbledore, nor of
anyone else.
“Mr. Dumbledore?” said Hermione rather timidly. “Is
that your sister? Ariana?”
“Yes,” said Aberforth tersely. “Been reading Rita
Skeeter, have you, missy?”
Even by the rosy light of the fire it was clear that
Hermione had turned red.
“Elphias Doge mentioned her to us,” said Harry,
trying to spare Hermione.
“That old berk,” muttered Aberforth, taking another
swig of mead. “Thought the sun shone out of my
brother’s every orifice, he did. Well, so did plenty of
people, you three included, by the looks of it.”
Harry kept quiet. He did not want to express the
doubts and uncertainties about Dumbledore that had
riddled him for months now. He had made his choice
while he dug Dobby’s grave, he had decided to
continue along the winding, dangerous path indicated
for him by Albus Dumbledore, to accept that he had
not been told everything that he wanted to know, but
simply to trust. He had no desire to doubt again; he
did not want to hear anything that would deflect him
from his purpose. He met Aberforth ’s gaze, which was
so strikingly like his brother’s: The bright blue eyes
gave the same impression that they were X-raying the
 
object of their scrutiny, and Harry thought that
Aberforth knew what he was thinking and despised
him for it.
“Professor Dumbledore cared about Harry, very
much,” said Hermione in a low voice.
“Did he now?” said Aberforth. “Funny thing, how
many of the people my brother cared about very
much ended up in a worse state than if he’d left ’em
well alone.”
“What do you mean?” asked Hermione breathlessly.
“Never you mind,” said Aberforth.
“But that’s a really serious thing to say!” said
Hermione. “Are you — are you talking about your
sister?”
Aberforth glared at her: His lips moved as if he were
chewing the words he was holding back. Then he
burst into speech.
“When my sister was six years old, she was attacked,
set upon, by three Muggle boys. They’d seen her
doing magic, spying through the back garden hedge:
She was a kid, she couldn’t control it, no witch or
wizard can at that age. What they saw scared them, I
expect. They forced their way through the hedge, and
when she couldn’t show them the trick, they got a bit
carried away trying to stop the little freak doing it.”
Hermione ’s eyes were huge in the firelight; Ron looked
slightly sick. Aberforth stood up, tall as Albus, and
suddenly terrible in his anger and the intensity of his
pain.
 
“It destroyed her, what they did: She was never right
again. She wouldn’t use magic, but she couldn’t get
rid of it; it turned inward and drove her mad, it
exploded out of her when she couldn’t control it, and
at times she was strange and dangerous. But mostly
she was sweet and scared and harmless.
“And my father went after the bastards that did it,”
said Aberforth, “and attacked them. And they locked
him up in Azkaban for it. He never said why he’d
done it, because if the Ministry had known what
Ariana had become, she’d have been locked up in St.
Mungo’s for good. They’d have seen her as a serious
threat to the International Statute of Secrecy,
unbalanced like she was, with magic exploding out of
her at moments when she couldn’t keep it in any
longer.
“We had to keep her safe and quiet. We moved house,
put it about she was ill, and my mother looked after
her, and tried to keep her calm and happy.
“I was her favorite,” he said, and as he said it, a
grubby schoolboy seemed to look out through
Aberforth’s wrinkles and tangled beard. “Not Albus,
he was always up in his bedroom when he was home,
reading his books and counting his prizes, keeping up
with his correspondence with ‘the most notable
magical names of the day,’ ” Aberforth sneered. “He
didn’t want to be bothered with her. She liked me
best. I could get her to eat when she wouldn’t do it for
my mother, I could get her to calm down when she
was in one of her rages, and when she was quiet, she
used to help me feed the goats.
“Then, when she was fourteen ... See, I wasn’t there,”
said Aberforth. “If I’d been there, I could have calmed
her down. She had one of her rages, and my mother
wasn’t as young as she was, and ... it was an
 
accident. Ariana couldn’t control it. But my mother
was killed.”
Harry felt a horrible mixture of pity and repulsion; he
did not want to hear any more, but Aberforth kept
talking, and Harry wondered how long it had been
since he had spoken about this; whether, in fact, he
had ever spoken about it.
“So that put paid to Albus’s trip round the world with
little Doge. The pair of ’em came home for my
mother’s funeral and then Doge went off on his own,
and Albus settled down as head of the family. Ha!”
Aberforth spat into the fire.
“I’d have looked after her, I told him so, I didn’t care
about school, I’d have stayed home and done it. He
told me I had to finish my education and he’d take
over from my mother. Bit of a comedown for Mr.
Brilliant, there’s no prizes for looking after your half-
mad sister, stopping her blowing up the house every
other day. But he did all right for a few weeks . . . till
he came.”
And now a positively dangerous look crept over
Aberforth’s face.
“Grindelwald. And at last, my brother had an equal to
talk to, someone just as bright and talented as he
was. And looking after Ariana took a backseat then,
while they were hatching all their plans for a new
Wizarding order, and looking for Hallows, and
whatever else it was they were so interested in. Grand
plans for the benefit of all Wizardkind, and if one
young girl got neglected, what did that matter, when
Albus was working for the greater good?
 
“But after a few weeks of it, I’d had enough, I had. It
was nearly time for me to go back to Hogwarts, so I
told ’em, both of ’em, face-to-face, like I am to you,
now,” and Aberforth looked down at Harry, and it
took little imagination to see him as a teenager, wiry
and angry, confronting his elder brother. “I told him,
you’d better give it up now. You can’t move her, she’s
in no fit state, you can’t take her with you, wherever it
is you’re planning to go, when you’re making your
clever speeches, trying to whip yourselves up a
following. He didn’t like that,” said Aberforth, and his
eyes were briefly occluded by the firelight on the
lenses of his glasses: They shone white and blind
again. “Grindelwald didn’t like that at all. He got
angry. He told me what a stupid little boy I was,
trying to stand in the way of him and my brilliant
brother. ... Didn’t I understand, my poor sister
wouldn’t have to be hidden once they’d changed the
world, and led the wizards out of hiding, and taught
the Muggles their place?
“And there was an argument . . . and I pulled out my
wand, and he pulled out his, and I had the Cruciatus
Curse used on me by my brother’s best friend — and
Albus was trying to stop him, and then all three of us
were dueling, and the flashing lights and the bangs
set her off, she couldn’t stand it — ”
The color was draining from Aberforth ’s face as
though he had suffered a mortal wound.
“ — and I think she wanted to help, but she didn’t
really know what she was doing, and I don’t know
which of us did it, it could have been any of us — and
she was dead.”
His voice broke on the last word and he dropped
down into the nearest chair. Hermione’s face was wet
with tears, and Ron was almost as pale as Aberforth.
 
Harry felt nothing but revulsion: He wished he had
not heard it, wished he could wash his mind clean of
it.
“I’m so ... I’m so sorry,” Hermione whispered.
“Gone,” croaked Aberforth. “Gone forever.”
He wiped his nose on his cuff and cleared his throat.
“ ’Course, Grindelwald scarpered. He had a bit of a
track record already, back in his own country, and he
didn’t want Ariana set to his account too. And Albus
was free, wasn’t he? Free of the burden of his sister,
free to become the greatest wizard of the — ”
“He was never free,” said Harry.
“I beg your pardon?” said Aberforth.
“Never,” said Harry. “The night that your brother died,
he drank a potion that drove him out of his mind. He
started screaming, pleading with someone who wasn’t
there. ‘Don’t hurt them, please ... hurt me instead.’ ”
Ron and Hermione were staring at Harry. He had
never gone into details about what had happened on
the island on the lake: The events that had taken
place after he and Dumbledore had returned to
Hogwarts had eclipsed it so thoroughly.
“He thought he was back there with you and
Grindelwald, I know he did,” said Harry, remembering
Dumbledore whimpering, pleading. “He thought he
was watching Grindelwald hurting you and Ariana. . . .
It was torture to him, if you’d seen him then, you
wouldn’t say he was free.”
 
Aberforth seemed lost in contemplation of his own
knotted and veined hands. After a long pause he said,
“How can you be sure, Potter, that my brother wasn’t
more interested in the greater good than in you? How
can you be sure you aren’t dispensable, just like my
little sister?”
A shard of ice seemed to pierce Harry’s heart.
“I don’t believe it. Dumbledore loved Harry,” said
Hermione.
“Why didn’t he tell him to hide, then?” shot back
Aberforth. “Why didn’t he say to him, Take care of
yourself, here’s how to survive’?”
“Because,” said Harry before Hermione could answer,
“sometimes you’ve got to think about more than your
own safety! Sometimes you’ve got to think about the
greater good! This is war!”
“You’re seventeen, boy!”
“I’m of age, and I’m going to keep fighting even if
you’ve given up!”
“Who says I’ve given up?”
“ The Order of the Phoenix is finished,’ ” Harry
repeated. “ Tou- Know- Who’s won, it’s over, and
anyone who’s pretending different’s kidding
themselves.’ ”
“I don’t say I like it, but it’s the truth!”
“No, it isn’t,” said Harry. “Your brother knew how to
finish You-Know-Who and he passed the knowledge
on to me. I’m going to keep going until I succeed — or
 
I die. Don’t think I don’t know how this might end.
I’ve known it for years.”
He waited for Aberforth to jeer or to argue, but he did
not. He merely scowled.
“We need to get into Hogwarts,” said Harry again. “If
you can’t help us, we’ll wait till daybreak, leave you in
peace, and try to find a way in ourselves. If you can
help us — well, now would be a great time to mention
it.”
Aberforth remained fixed in his chair, gazing at Harry
with the eyes that were so extraordinarily like his
brother’s. At last he cleared his throat, got to his feet,
walked around the little table, and approached the
portrait of Ariana.
“You know what to do,” he said.
She smiled, turned, and walked away, not as people
in portraits usually did, out of the sides of their
frames, but along what seemed to be a long tunnel
painted behind her. They watched her slight figure
retreating until finally she was swallowed by the
darkness.
“Er — what — ?” began Ron.
“There’s only one way in now,” said Aberforth. “You
must know they’ve got all the old secret passageways
covered at both ends, dementors all around the
boundary walls, regular patrols inside the school from
what my sources tell me. The place has never been so
heavily guarded. How you expect to do anything once
you get inside it, with Snape in charge and the
Carrows as his deputies ... well, that’s your lookout,
isn’t it? You say you’re prepared to die.”
 
“But what ... ?” said Hermione, frowning at Ariana’s
picture.
A tiny white dot had reappeared at the end of the
painted tunnel, and now Ariana was walking back
toward them, growing bigger and bigger as she came.
But there was somebody else with her now, someone
taller than she was, who was limping along, looking
excited. His hair was longer than Harry had ever seen
it: He appeared to have suffered several gashes to his
face and his clothes were ripped and torn. Larger and
larger the two figures grew, until only their heads and
shoulders filled the portrait. Then the whole thing
swung forward on the wall like a little door, and the
entrance to a real tunnel was revealed. And out of it,
his hair overgrown, his face cut, his robes ripped,
clambered the real Neville Longbottom, who gave a
roar of delight, leapt down from the mantelpiece, and
yelled, “I knew you’d come! I knew it, HarryY’
 
THE LOST DIADEM
“Neville — what the — how — ?”
But Neville had spotted Ron and Hermione, and with
yells of delight was hugging them too. The longer
Harry looked at Neville, the worse he appeared: One
of his eyes was swollen yellow and purple, there were
gouge marks on his face, and his general air of
unkemptness suggested that he had been living
rough. Nevertheless, his battered visage shone with
happiness as he let go of Hermione and said again, “I
knew you’d come! Kept telling Seamus it was a matter
of time!”
“Neville, what’s happened to you?”
“What? This?” Neville dismissed his injuries with a
shake of the head. “This is nothing. Seamus is worse.
You’ll see. Shall we get going then? Oh,” he turned to
Aberforth, “Ab, there might be a couple more people
on the way.”
 
“Couple more?” repeated Aberforth ominously. “What
d’you mean, a couple more, Longbottom? There’s a
curfew and a Caterwauling Charm on the whole
village!”
“I know, that’s why they’ll be Apparating directly into
the bar,” said Neville. “Just send them down the
passage when they get here, will you? Thanks a lot.”
Neville held out his hand to Hermione and helped her
to climb up onto the mantelpiece and into the tunnel;
Ron followed, then Neville. Harry addressed
Aberforth.
“I don’t know how to thank you. You’ve saved our
lives twice.”
“Look after ’em, then,” said Aberforth gruffly. “I might
not be able to save ’em a third time.”
Harry clambered up onto the mantelpiece and
through the hole behind Ariana’s portrait. There were
smooth stone steps on the other side: It looked as
though the passageway had been there for years.
Brass lamps hung from the walls and the earthy floor
was worn and smooth; as they walked, their shadows
rippled, fanlike, across the wall.
“How long’s this been here?” Ron asked as they set
off. “It isn’t on the Marauder’s Map, is it, Harry? I
thought there were only seven passages in and out of
school?”
“They sealed off all of those before the start of the
year,” said Neville. “There’s no chance of getting
through any of them now, not with curses over the
entrances and Death Eaters and dementors waiting at
the exits.” He started walking backward, beaming,
drinking them in. “Never mind that stuff. ... Is it true?
 
Did you break into Gringotts? Did you escape on a
dragon? It’s everywhere, everyone’s talking about it,
Terry Boot got beaten up by Carrow for yelling about
it in the Great Hall at dinner!”
“Yeah, it’s true,” said Harry.
Neville laughed gleefully.
“What did you do with the dragon?”
“Released it into the wild,” said Ron. “Hermione was
all for keeping it as a pet — ”
“Don’t exaggerate, Ron — ”
“But what have you been doing? People have been
saying you’ve just been on the run, Harry, but I don’t
think so. I think you’ve been up to something.”
“You’re right,” said Harry, “but tell us about
Hogwarts, Neville, we haven’t heard anything.”
“It’s been ... well, it’s not really like Hogwarts
anymore,” said Neville, the smile fading from his face
as he spoke. “Do you know about the Carrows?”
“Those two Death Eaters who teach here?”
“They do more than teach,” said Neville. “They’re in
charge of all discipline. They like punishment, the
Carrows.”
“Like Umbridge?”
“Nah, they make her look tame. The other teachers
are all supposed to refer us to the Carrows if we do
anything wrong. They don’t, though, if they can avoid
it. You can tell they all hate them as much as we do.
 
“Amycus, the bloke, he teaches what used to be
Defense Against the Dark Arts, except now it’s just
the Dark Arts. We’re supposed to practice the
Cruciatus Curse on people who’ve earned detentions
“What?”
Harry, Ron, and Hermione’s united voices echoed up
and down the passage.
“Yeah,” said Neville. “That’s how I got this one,” he
pointed at a particularly deep gash in his cheek, “I
refused to do it. Some people are into it, though;
Crabbe and Goyle love it. First time they’ve ever been
top in anything, I expect.
“Alecto, Amycus’s sister, teaches Muggle Studies,
which is compulsory for everyone. We’ve all got to
listen to her explain how Muggles are like animals,
stupid and dirty, and how they drove wizards into
hiding by being vicious toward them, and how the
natural order is being reestablished. I got this one,”
he indicated another slash to his face, “for asking her
how much Muggle blood she and her brother have
got.”
“Blimey, Neville,” said Ron, “there’s a time and a place
for getting a smart mouth.”
“You didn’t hear her,” said Neville. “You wouldn’t have
stood it either. The thing is, it helps when people
stand up to them, it gives everyone hope. I used to
notice that when you did it, Harry.”
“But they’ve used you as a knife sharpener,” said
Ron, wincing slightly as they passed a lamp and
Neville’s injuries were thrown into even greater relief.
 
Neville shrugged.
“Doesn’t matter. They don’t want to spill too much
pure blood, so they’ll torture us a bit if we’re mouthy
but they won’t actually kill us.”
Harry did not know what was worse, the things that
Neville was saying or the matter-of-fact tone in which
he said them.
“The only people in real danger are the ones whose
friends and relatives on the outside are giving trouble.
They get taken hostage. Old Xeno Lovegood was
getting a bit too outspoken in The Quihhler, so they
dragged Luna off the train on the way back for
Christmas.”
“Neville, she’s all right, we’ve seen her — ”
“Yeah, I know, she managed to get a message to me.”
From his pocket he pulled a golden coin, and Harry
recognized it as one of the fake Galleons that
Dumbledore’s Army had used to send one another
messages.
“These have been great,” said Neville, beaming at
Hermione. “The Carrows never rumbled how we were
communicating, it drove them mad. We used to sneak
out at night and put graffiti on the walls:
Dumbledore’s Army, Still Recruiting, stuff like that.
Snape hated it.”
“You used to?” said Harry, who had noticed the past
tense.
“Well, it got more difficult as time went on,” said
Neville. “We lost Luna at Christmas, and Ginny never
came back after Easter, and the three of us were sort
 
of the leaders. The Carrows seemed to know I was
behind a lot of it, so they started coming down on me
hard, and then Michael Corner went and got caught
releasing a first-year they’d chained up, and they
tortured him pretty badly. That scared people off.”
“No kidding,” muttered Ron, as the passage began to
slope upward.
“Yeah, well, I couldn’t ask people to go through what
Michael did, so we dropped those kinds of stunts. But
we were still fighting, doing underground stuff, right
up until a couple of weeks ago. That’s when they
decided there was only one way to stop me, I suppose,
and they went for Gran.”
“They what?” said Harry, Ron, and Hermione
together.
“Yeah,” said Neville, panting a little now, because the
passage was climbing so steeply, “well, you can see
their thinking. It had worked really well, kidnapping
kids to force their relatives to behave, I s’pose it was
only a matter of time before they did it the other way
around. Thing was,” he faced them, and Harry was
astonished to see that he was grinning, “they bit off a
bit more than they could chew with Gran. Little old
witch living alone, they probably thought they didn’t
need to send anyone particularly powerful. Anyway,”
Neville laughed, “Dawlish is still in St. Mungo’s and
Gran’s on the run. She sent me a letter,” he clapped a
hand to the breast pocket of his robes, “telling me she
was proud of me, that I’m my parents’ son, and to
keep it up.”
“Cool,” said Ron.
“Yeah,” said Neville happily. “Only thing was, once
they realized they had no hold over me, they decided
 
Hogwarts could do without me after all. I don’t know
whether they were planning to kill me or send me to
Azkaban; either way, I knew it was time to disappear.”
“But,” said Ron, looking thoroughly confused, “aren’t
— aren’t we heading straight back into Hogwarts?”
“ ’Course,” said Neville. “You’ll see. We’re here.”
They turned a corner and there ahead of them was
the end of the passage. Another short flight of steps
led to a door just like the one hidden behind Ariana’s
portrait. Neville pushed it open and climbed through.
As Harry followed, he heard Neville call out to unseen
people:
“Look who it is! Didn’t I tell you?”
As Harry emerged into the room beyond the passage,
there were several screams and yells: “HARRY!” “It’s
Potter, it’s POTTER!” “Ron!” “Hermionel”
He had a confused impression of colored hangings, of
lamps and many faces. The next moment, he, Ron,
and Hermione were engulfed, hugged, pounded on the
back, their hair ruffled, their hands shaken, by what
seemed to be more than twenty people: They might
just have won a Quidditch final.
“Okay, okay, calm down!” Neville called, and as the
crowd backed away, Harry was able to take in their
surroundings.
He did not recognize the room at all. It was enormous,
and looked rather like the interior of a particularly
sumptuous tree house, or perhaps a gigantic ship’s
cabin. Multicolored hammocks were strung from the
ceiling and from a balcony that ran around the dark
wood-paneled and windowless walls, which were
 
covered in bright tapestry hangings: Harry saw the
gold Gryffindor lion, emblazoned on scarlet; the black
badger of Hufflepuff, set against yellow; and the
bronze eagle of Ravenclaw, on blue. The silver and
green of Slytherin alone were absent. There were
bulging bookcases, a few broomsticks propped
against the walls, and in the corner, a large wooden-
cased wireless.
“Where are we?”
“Room of Requirement, of course!” said Neville.
“Surpassed itself, hasn’t it? The Carrows were
chasing me, and I knew I had just one chance for a
hideout: I managed to get through the door and this
is what I found! Well, it wasn’t exactly like this when I
arrived, it was a load smaller, there was only one
hammock and just Gryffindor hangings. But it’s
expanded as more and more of the D.A. have arrived.”
“And the Carrows can’t get in?” asked Harry, looking
around for the door.
“No,” said Seamus Finnigan, whom Harry had not
recognized until he spoke: Seamus’s face was bruised
and puffy. “It’s a proper hideout, as long as one of us
stays in here, they can’t get at us, the door won’t
open. It’s all down to Neville. He really gets this room.
You’ve got to ask it for exactly what you need — like,
‘I don’t want any Carrow supporters to be able to get
in’ — and it’ll do it for you! You’ve just got to make
sure you close the loopholes! Neville’s the man!”
“It’s quite straightforward, really,” said Neville
modestly. “I’d been in here about a day and a half,
and getting really hungry, and wishing I could get
something to eat, and that’s when the passage to the
Hog’s Head opened up. I went through it and met
Aberforth. He’s been providing us with food, because
 
for some reason, that’s the one thing the room doesn’t
really do.”
“Yeah, well, food’s one of the five exceptions to
Gamp’s Law of Elemental Transfiguration,” said Ron
to general astonishment.
“So we’ve been hiding out here for nearly two weeks,”
said Seamus, “and it just makes more hammocks
every time we need them, and it even sprouted a
pretty good bathroom once girls started turning up —
“ — and thought they’d quite like to wash, yes,”
supplied Lavender Brown, whom Harry had not
noticed until that point. Now that he looked around
properly, he recognized many familiar faces. Both
Patil twins were there, as were Terry Boot, Ernie
Macmillan, Anthony Goldstein, and Michael Corner.
“Tell us what you’ve been up to, though,” said Ernie.
“There’ve been so many rumors, we’ve been trying to
keep up with you on Potterwatch.” He pointed at the
wireless. “You didn’t break into Gringotts?”
“They did!” said Neville. “And the dragon’s true too!”
There was a smattering of applause and a few
whoops; Ron took a bow.
“What were you after?” asked Seamus eagerly.
Before any of them could parry the question with one
of their own, Harry felt a terrible, scorching pain in
the lightning scar. As he turned his back hastily on
the curious and delighted faces, the Room of
Requirement vanished, and he was standing inside a
ruined stone shack, and the rotting floorboards were
ripped apart at his feet, a disinterred golden box lay
 
open and empty beside the hole, and Voldemort’s
scream of fury vibrated inside his head.
With an enormous effort he pulled out of Voldemort’s
mind again, back to where he stood, swaying, in the
Room of Requirement, sweat pouring from his face
and Ron holding him up.
“Are you all right, Harry?” Neville was saying. “Want
to sit down? I expect you’re tired, aren’t — ?”
“No,” said Harry. He looked at Ron and Hermione,
trying to tell them without words that Voldemort had
just discovered the loss of one of the other Horcruxes.
Time was running out fast: If Voldemort chose to visit
Hogwarts next, they would miss their chance.
“We need to get going,” he said, and their expressions
told him that they understood.
“What are we going to do, then, Harry?” asked
Seamus. “What’s the plan?”
“Plan?” repeated Harry. He was exercising all his
willpower to prevent himself succumbing again to
Voldemort’s rage: His scar was still burning. “Well,
there’s something we — Ron, Hermione, and I — need
to do, and then we’ll get out of here.”
Nobody was laughing or whooping anymore. Neville
looked confused.
“What d’you mean, ‘get out of here’?”
“We haven’t come back to stay,” said Harry, rubbing
his scar, trying to soothe the pain. “There’s something
important we need to do — ”
“What is it?”
 
“I — I can’t tell you.”
There was a ripple of muttering at this: Neville’s
brows contracted.
“Why can’t you tell us? It’s something to do with
fighting You-Know-Who, right?”
“Well, yeah — ”
“Then we’ll help you.”
The other members of Dumbledore’s Army were
nodding, some enthusiastically, others solemnly. A
couple of them rose from their chairs to demonstrate
their willingness for immediate action.
“You don’t understand.” Harry seemed to have said
that a lot in the last few hours. “We — we can’t tell
you. We’ve got to do it — alone.”
“Why?” asked Neville.
“Because ...” In his desperation to start looking for
the missing Horcrux, or at least to have a private
discussion with Ron and Hermione about where they
might commence their search, Harry found it difficult
to gather his thoughts. His scar was still searing.
“Dumbledore left the three of us a job,” he said
carefully, “and we weren’t supposed to tell — I mean,
he wanted us to do it, just the three of us.”
“We’re his army,” said Neville. “Dumbledore’s Army.
We were all in it together, we’ve been keeping it going
while you three have been off on your own — ”
“It hasn’t exactly been a picnic, mate,” said Ron.
 
“I never said it had, but I don’t see why you can’t
trust us. Everyone in this room’s been fighting and
they’ve been driven in here because the Carrows were
hunting them down. Everyone in here’s proven they’re
loyal to Dumbledore — loyal to you.”
“Look,” Harry began, without knowing what he was
going to say, but it did not matter: The tunnel door
had just opened behind him.
“We got your message, Neville! Hello you three, I
thought you must be here!”
It was Luna and Dean. Seamus gave a great roar of
delight and ran to hug his best friend.
“Hi, everyone!” said Luna happily. “Oh, it’s great to be
back!”
“Luna,” said Harry distractedly, “what are you doing
here? How did you — ?”
“I sent for her,” said Neville, holding up the fake
Galleon. “I promised her and Ginny that if you turned
up I’d let them know. We all thought that if you came
back, it would mean revolution. That we were going to
overthrow Snape and the Carrows.”
“Of course that’s what it means,” said Luna brightly.
“Isn’t it, Harry? We’re going to fight them out of
Hogwarts?”
“Listen,” said Harry with a rising sense of panic, “I’m
sorry, but that’s not what we came back for. There’s
something we’ve got to do, and then — ”
“You’re going to leave us in this mess?” demanded
Michael Corner.
 
“No!” said Ron. “What we’re doing will benefit
everyone in the end, it’s all about trying to get rid of
You-Know-Who — ”
“Then let us help!” said Neville angrily. “We want to be
a part of it!”
There was another noise behind them, and Harry
turned. His heart seemed to fail: Ginny was now
climbing through the hole in the wall, closely followed
by Fred, George, and Lee Jordan. Ginny gave Harry a
radiant smile: He had forgotten, or had never fully
appreciated, how beautiful she was, but he had never
been less pleased to see her.
“Aberforth’s getting a bit annoyed,” said Fred, raising
his hand in answer to several cries of greeting. “He
wants a kip, and his bar’s turned into a railway
station.”
Harry’s mouth fell open. Right behind Lee Jordan
came Harry’s old girlfriend, Cho Chang. She smiled at
him.
“I got the message,” she said, holding up her own fake
Galleon, and she walked over to sit beside Michael
Corner.
“So what’s the plan, Harry?” said George.
“There isn’t one,” said Harry, still disoriented by the
sudden appearance of all these people, unable to take
everything in while his scar was still burning so
fiercely.
“Just going to make it up as we go along, are we? My
favorite kind,” said Fred.
 
“You’ve got to stop this!” Harry told Neville. “What did
you call them all back for? This is insane — ”
“We’re fighting, aren’t we?” said Dean, taking out his
fake Galleon. “The message said Harry was back, and
we were going to fight! I’ll have to get a wand, though
“You haven’t got a wand — ?” began Seamus.
Ron turned suddenly to Harry.
“Why can’t they help?”
“What?”
“They can help.” He dropped his voice and said, so
that none of them could hear but Hermione, who
stood between them, “We don’t know where it is.
We’ve got to find it fast. We don’t have to tell them it’s
a Horcrux.”
Harry looked from Ron to Hermione, who murmured,
“I think Ron’s right. We don’t even know what we’re
looking for, we need them.” And when Harry looked
unconvinced, “You don’t have to do everything alone,
Harry.”
Harry thought fast, his scar still prickling, his head
threatening to split again. Dumbledore had warned
him against telling anyone but Ron and Hermione
about the Horcruxes. Secrets and lies, that’s how we
grew up, and Albus ...he was a natural. ... Was he
turning into Dumbledore, keeping his secrets
clutched to his chest, afraid to trust? But
Dumbledore had trusted Snape, and where had that
led? To murder at the top of the highest tower ...
 
“All right,” he said quietly to the other two. “Okay,” he
called to the room at large, and all noise ceased: Fred
and George, who had been cracking jokes for the
benefit of those nearest, fell silent, and all of them
looked alert, excited.
“There’s something we need to find,” Harry said.
“Something — something that’ll help us overthrow
You-Know-Who. It’s here at Hogwarts, but we don’t
know where. It might have belonged to Ravenclaw.
Has anyone heard of an object like that? Has anyone
ever come across something with her eagle on it, for
instance?”
He looked hopefully toward the little group of
Ravenclaws, to Padma, Michael, Terry, and Cho, but
it was Luna who answered, perched on the arm of
Ginny’s chair.
“Well, there’s her lost diadem. I told you about it,
remember, Harry? The lost diadem of Ravenclaw?
Daddy’s trying to duplicate it.”
“Yeah, but the lost diadem,” said Michael Corner,
rolling his eyes, “is lost, Luna. That’s sort of the
point.”
“When was it lost?” asked Harry.
“Centuries ago, they say,” said Cho, and Harry’s heart
sank. “Professor Flitwick says the diadem vanished
with Ravenclaw herself. People have looked, but,” she
appealed to her fellow Ravenclaws, “nobody’s ever
found a trace of it, have they?”
They all shook their heads.
“Sorry, but what is a diadem?” asked Ron.
 
“It’s a kind of crown,” said Terry Boot. “Ravenclaw’s
was supposed to have magical properties, enhance
the wisdom of the wearer.”
“Yes, Daddy’s Wrackspurt siphons — ”
But Harry cut across Luna.
“And none of you have ever seen anything that looks
like it?”
They all shook their heads again. Harry looked at Ron
and Hermione and his own disappointment was
mirrored back at him. An object that had been lost
this long, and apparently without trace, did not seem
like a good candidate for the Horcrux hidden in the
castle. ... Before he could formulate a new question,
however, Cho spoke again.
“If you’d like to see what the diadem’s supposed to
look like, I could take you up to our common room
and show you, Harry? Ravenclaw’s wearing it in her
statue.”
Harry’s scar scorched again: For a moment the Room
of Requirement swam before him, and he saw instead
the dark earth soaring beneath him and felt the great
snake wrapped around his shoulders. Voldemort was
flying again, whether to the underground lake or here,
to the castle, he did not know: Either way, there was
hardly any time left.
“He’s on the move,” he said quietly to Ron and
Hermione. He glanced at Cho and then back at them.
“Listen, I know it’s not much of a lead, but I’m going
to go and look at this statue, at least find out what
the diadem looks like. Wait for me here and keep, you
know — the other one — safe.”
 
Cho had got to her feet, but Ginny said rather
fiercely, “No, Luna will take Harry, won’t you, Luna?”
“Oooh, yes, I’d like to,” said Luna happily, and Cho
sat down again, looking disappointed.
“How do we get out?” Harry asked Neville.
“Over here.”
He led Harry and Luna to a corner, where a small
cupboard opened onto a steep staircase.
“It comes out somewhere different every day, so
they’ve never been able to find it,” he said. “Only
trouble is, we never know exactly where we’re going to
end up when we go out. Be careful, Harry, they’re
always patrolling the corridors at night.”
“No problem,” said Harry. “See you in a bit.”
He and Luna hurried up the staircase, which was
long, lit by torches, and turned corners in unexpected
places. At last they reached what appeared to be solid
wall.
“Get under here,” Harry told Luna, pulling out the
Invisibility Cloak and throwing it over both of them.
He gave the wall a little push.
It melted away at his touch and they slipped outside:
Harry glanced back and saw that it had resealed itself
at once. They were standing in a dark corridor: Harry
pulled Luna back into the shadows, fumbled in the
pouch around his neck, and took out the Marauder’s
Map. Holding it close to his nose he searched, and
located his and Luna’s dots at last.
 
“We’re up on the fifth floor,” he whispered, watching
Filch moving away from them, a corridor ahead.
“Come on, this way.”
They crept off.
Harry had prowled the castle at night many times
before, but never had his heart hammered this fast,
never had so much depended on his safe passage
through the place. Through squares of moonlight
upon the floor, past suits of armor whose helmets
creaked at the sound of their soft footsteps, around
corners beyond which who knew what lurked, Harry
and Luna walked, checking the Marauder’s Map
whenever light permitted, twice pausing to allow a
ghost to pass without drawing attention to
themselves. He expected to encounter an obstacle at
any moment; his worst fear was Peeves, and he
strained his ears with every step to hear the first,
telltale signs of the poltergeist’s approach.
“This way, Harry,” breathed Luna, plucking his sleeve
and pulling him toward a spiral staircase.
They climbed in tight, dizzying circles; Harry had
never been up here before. At last they reached a
door. There was no handle and no keyhole: nothing
but a plain expanse of aged wood, and a bronze
knocker in the shape of an eagle.
Luna reached out a pale hand, which looked eerie
floating in midair, unconnected to arm or body. She
knocked once, and in the silence it sounded to Harry
like a cannon blast. At once the beak of the eagle
opened, but instead of a bird’s call, a soft, musical
voice said, “Which came first, the phoenix or the
flame?”
 
“Hmm . . . What do you think, Harry?” said Luna,
looking thoughtful.
“What? Isn’t there just a password?”
“Oh no, you’ve got to answer a question,” said Luna.
“What if you get it wrong?”
“Well, you have to wait for somebody who gets it
right,” said Luna. “That way you learn, you see?”
“Yeah ... Trouble is, we can’t really afford to wait for
anyone else, Luna.”
“No, I see what you mean,” said Luna seriously. “Well
then, I think the answer is that a circle has no
beginning.”
“Well reasoned,” said the voice, and the door swung
open.
The deserted Ravenclaw common room was a wide,
circular room, airier than any Harry had ever seen at
Hogwarts. Graceful arched windows punctuated the
walls, which were hung with blue-and-bronze silks:
By day, the Ravenclaws would have a spectacular
view of the surrounding mountains. The ceiling was
domed and painted with stars, which were echoed in
the midnight-blue carpet. There were tables, chairs,
and bookcases, and in a niche opposite the door
stood a tall statue of white marble.
Harry recognized Rowena Ravenclaw from the bust he
had seen at Luna’s house. The statue stood beside a
door that led, he guessed, to dormitories above. He
strode right up to the marble woman, and she seemed
to look back at him with a quizzical half smile on her
face, beautiful yet slightly intimidating. A delicate-
P a g e | 663 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
looking circlet had been reproduced in marble on top
of her head. It was not unlike the tiara Fleur had
worn at her wedding. There were tiny words etched
into it. Harry stepped out from under the Cloak and
climbed up onto Ravenclaw’s plinth to read them.
“ ‘Wit beyond measure is man’s greatest treasure.’ ”
“Which makes you pretty skint, witless,” said a
cackling voice.
Harry whirled around, slipped off the plinth, and
landed on the floor. The sloping-shouldered figure of
Alecto Carrow was standing before him, and even as
Harry raised his wand, she pressed a stubby
forefinger to the skull and snake branded on her
forearm.
 
THE SACKING OF SEVERUS SNAPE
The moment her finger touched the Mark, Harry’s
scar burned savagely, the starry room vanished from
sight, and he was standing upon an outcrop of rock
beneath a cliff, and the sea was washing around him
and there was triumph in his heart — They have the
boy.
A loud bang brought Harry back to where he stood:
Disoriented, he raised his wand, but the witch before
him was already falling forward; she hit the ground so
hard that the glass in the bookcases tinkled.
“I’ve never Stunned anyone except in our D.A.
lessons,” said Luna, sounding mildly interested. “That
was noisier than I thought it would be.”
And sure enough, the ceiling had begun to tremble.
Scurrying, echoing footsteps were growing louder
from behind the door leading to the dormitories:
Luna’s spell had woken Ravenclaws sleeping above.
“Luna, where are you? I need to get under the Cloak!”
 
Luna’s feet appeared out of nowhere; he hurried to
her side and she let the Cloak fall back over them as
the door opened and a stream of Ravenclaws, all in
their nightclothes, flooded into the common room.
There were gasps and cries of surprise as they saw
Alecto lying there unconscious. Slowly they shuffled
in around her, a savage beast that might wake at any
moment and attack them. Then one brave little first-
year darted up to her and prodded her backside with
his big toe.
“I think she might be dead!” he shouted with delight.
“Oh, look,” whispered Luna happily, as the
Ravenclaws crowded in around Alecto. “They’re
pleased!”
“Yeah ... great ...”
Harry closed his eyes, and as his scar throbbed he
chose to sink again into Voldemort’s mind. ... He was
moving along the tunnel into the first cave. ... He had
chosen to make sure of the locket before coming . . .
but that would not take him long. . . .
There was a rap on the common room door and every
Ravenclaw froze. From the other side, Harry heard the
soft, musical voice that issued from the eagle door
knocker: “Where do Vanished objects go?”
“I dunno, do I? Shut it!” snarled an uncouth voice
that Harry knew was that of the Carrow brother,
Amycus. “Alecto? Alecto? Are you there? Have you got
him? Open the door!”
The Ravenclaws were whispering amongst
themselves, terrified. Then, without warning, there
came a series of loud bangs, as though somebody was
firing a gun into the door.
 
“ALECTO\ If he comes, and we haven’t got Potter —
d’you want to go the same way as the Malfoys?
ANSWER ME!” Amyous bellowed, shaking the door for
all he was worth, but still it did not open. The
Ravenclaws were all backing away, and some of the
most frightened began scampering back up the
staircase to their beds. Then, just as Harry was
wondering whether he ought not to blast open the
door and Stun Amycus before the Death Eater could
do anything else, a second, most familiar voice rang
out beyond the door.
“May I ask what you are doing, Professor Carrow?”
“Trying — to get — through this damned — door!”
shouted Amycus. “Go and get Flitwick! Get him to
open it, now!”
“But isn’t your sister in there?” asked Professor
McGonagall. “Didn’t Professor Flitwick let her in
earlier this evening, at your urgent request? Perhaps
she could open the door for you? Then you needn’t
wake up half the castle.”
“She ain’t answering, you old besom! You open it!
Garn! Do it, now!
“Certainly, if you wish it,” said Professor McGonagall,
with awful coldness. There was a genteel tap of the
knocker and the musical voice asked again,
“Where do Vanished objects go?”
“Into nonbeing, which is to say, everything,” replied
Professor McGonagall.
“Nicely phrased,” replied the eagle door knocker, and
the door swung open.
 
The few Ravenclaws who had remained behind
sprinted for the stairs as Amycus burst over the
threshold, brandishing his wand. Hunched like his
sister, he had a pallid, doughy face and tiny eyes,
which fell at once on Alecto, sprawled motionless on
the floor. He let out a yell of fury and fear.
“What’ve they done, the little whelps?” he screamed.
“I’ll Cruciate the lot of ’em till they tell me who did it
— and what’s the Dark Lord going to say?” he
shrieked, standing over his sister and smacking
himself on the forehead with his fist. “We haven’t got
him, and they’ve gorn and killed her!”
“She’s only Stunned,” said Professor McGonagall
impatiently, who had stooped down to examine
Alecto. “She’ll be perfectly all right.”
“No she bludgering well won’t!” bellowed Amycus. “Not
after the Dark Lord gets hold of her! She’s gorn and
sent for him, I felt me Mark burn, and he thinks we’ve
got Potter!”
“ ‘Got Potter’?” said Professor McGonagall sharply.
“What do you mean, ‘got Potter’?”
“He told us Potter might try and get inside Ravenclaw
Tower, and to send for him if we caught him!”
“Why would Harry Potter try to get inside Ravenclaw
Tower? Potter belongs in my House!”
Beneath the disbelief and anger, Harry heard a little
strain of pride in her voice, and affection for Minerva
McGonagall gushed up inside him.
“We was told he might come in here!” said Carrow. “I
dunno why, do I?”
 
Professor McGonagall stood up and her beady eyes
swept the room. Twice they passed right over the
place where Harry and Luna stood.
“We can push it off on the kids,” said Amycus, his
piglike face suddenly crafty. “Yeah, that’s what we’ll
do. Well say Alecto was ambushed by the kids, them
kids up there” — he looked up at the starry ceiling
toward the dormitories — “and we’ll say they forced
her to press her Mark, and that’s why he got a false
alarm. ... He can punish them. Couple of kids more or
less, what’s the difference?”
“Only the difference between truth and lies, courage
and cowardice,” said Professor McGonagall, who had
turned pale, “a difference, in short, which you and
your sister seem unable to appreciate. But let me
make one thing very clear. You are not going to pass
off your many ineptitudes on the students of
Hogwarts. I shall not permit it.”
“Excuse me?”
Amycus moved forward until he was offensively close
to Professor McGonagall, his face within inches of
hers. She refused to back away, but looked down at
him as if he were something disgusting she had found
stuck to a lavatory seat.
“It’s not a case of what you’ll permit, Minerva
McGonagall. Your time’s over. It’s us what’s in charge
here now, and you’ll back me up or you’ll pay the
price.”
And he spat in her face.
Harry pulled the Cloak off himself, raised his wand,
and said, “You shouldn’t have done that.”
 
As Amycus spun around, Harry shouted, “Crucio\”
The Death Eater was lifted off his feet. He writhed
through the air like a drowning man, thrashing and
howling in pain, and then, with a crunch and a
shattering of glass, he smashed into the front of a
bookcase and crumpled, insensible, to the floor.
“I see what Bellatrix meant,” said Harry, the blood
thundering through his brain, “you need to really
mean it.”
“Potter!” whispered Professor McGonagall, clutching
her heart. “Potter — you’re here! What — ? How — ?”
She struggled to pull herself together. “Potter, that
was foolish!”
“He spat at you,” said Harry.
“Potter, I — that was very — very gallant of you — but
don’t you realize — ?”
“Yeah, I do,” Harry assured her. Somehow her panic
steadied him. “Professor McGonagall, Voldemort’s on
the way.”
“Oh, are we allowed to say the name now?” asked
Luna with an air of interest, pulling off the Invisibility
Cloak. This appearance of a second outlaw seemed to
overwhelm Professor McGonagall, who staggered
backward and fell into a nearby chair, clutching at
the neck of her old tartan dressing gown.
“I don’t think it makes any difference what we call
him,” Harry told Luna. “He already knows where I
am.”
In a distant part of Harry’s brain, that part connected
to the angry, burning scar, he could see Voldemort
 
sailing fast over the dark lake in the ghostly green
boat. ... He had nearly reached the island where the
stone basin stood. ...
“You must flee,” whispered Professor McGonagall.
“Now, Potter, as quickly as you can!”
“I can’t,” said Harry. “There’s something I need to do.
Professor, do you know where the diadem of
Ravenclaw is?”
“The d-diadem of Ravenclaw? Of course not — hasn’t
it been lost for centuries?” She sat up a little
straighter. “Potter, it was madness, utter madness,
for you to enter this castle — ”
“I had to,” said Harry. “Professor, there’s something
hidden here that I’m supposed to find, and it could be
the diadem — if I could just speak to Professor
Flitwick — ”
There was a sound of movement, of clinking glass:
Amycus was coming round. Before Harry or Luna
could act, Professor McGonagall rose to her feet,
pointed her wand at the groggy Death Eater, and
said, “Imperio.”
Amycus got up, walked over to his sister, picked up
her wand, then shuffled obediently to Professor
McGonagall and handed it over along with his own.
Then he lay down on the floor beside Alecto. Professor
McGonagall waved her wand again, and a length of
shimmering silver rope appeared out of thin air and
snaked around the Carrows, binding them tightly
together.
“Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, turning to face
him again with superb indifference to the Carrows’
 
predicament, “if He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named does
indeed know that you are here — ”
As she said it, a wrath that was like physical pain
blazed through Harry, setting his scar on fire, and for
a second he looked down upon a basin whose potion
had turned clear, and saw that no golden locket lay
safe beneath the surface —
“Potter, are you all right?” said a voice, and Harry
came back: He was clutching Luna’s shoulder to
steady himself.
“Time’s running out, Voldemort’s getting nearer.
Professor, I’m acting on Dumbledore’s orders, I must
find what he wanted me to find! But we’ve got to get
the students out while I’m searching the castle — it’s
me Voldemort wants, but he won’t care about killing a
few more or less, not now — ” not now he knows I’m
attacking Horcruxes, Harry finished the sentence in
his head.
“You’re acting on Dumbledore’s orders?” she repeated
with a look of dawning wonder. Then she drew herself
up to her fullest height.
“We shall secure the school against He-Who-Must-
Not-Be-Named while you search for this — this
object.”
“Is that possible?”
“I think so,” said Professor McGonagall dryly, “we
teachers are rather good at magic, you know. I am
sure we will be able to hold him off for a while if we all
put our best efforts into it. Of course, something will
have to be done about Professor Snape — ”
“Let me — ”
 
“ — and if Hogwarts is about to enter a state of siege,
with the Dark Lord at the gates, it would indeed be
advisable to take as many innocent people out of the
way as possible. With the Floo Network under
observation, and Apparition impossible within the
grounds — ”
“There’s a way,” said Harry quickly, and he explained
about the passageway leading into the Hog’s Head.
“Potter, we’re talking about hundreds of students — ”
“I know, Professor, but if Voldemort and the Death
Eaters are concentrating on the school boundaries
they won’t be interested in anyone who’s
Disapparating out of the Hog’s Head.”
“There’s something in that,” she agreed. She pointed
her wand at the Carrows, and a silver net fell upon
their bound bodies, tied itself around them, and
hoisted them into the air, where they dangled beneath
the blue-and-gold ceiling like two large, ugly sea
creatures. “Come. We must alert the other Heads of
House. You’d better put that Cloak back on.”
She marched toward the door, and as she did so she
raised her wand. From the tip burst three silver cats
with spectacle markings around their eyes. The
Patronuses ran sleekly ahead, filling the spiral
staircase with silvery light, as Professor McGonagall,
Harry, and Luna hurried back down.
Along the corridors they raced, and one by one the
Patronuses left them; Professor McGonagall’s tartan
dressing gown rustled over the floor, and Harry and
Luna jogged behind her under the Cloak.
They had descended two more floors when another
set of quiet footsteps joined theirs. Harry, whose scar
 
was still prickling, heard them first: He felt in the
pouch around his neck for the Marauder’s Map, but
before he could take it out, McGonagall too seemed to
become aware of their company. She halted, raised
her wand ready to duel, and said, “Who’s there?”
“It is I,” said a low voice.
From behind a suit of armor stepped Severus Snape.
Hatred boiled up in Harry at the sight of him: He had
forgotten the details of Snape ’s appearance in the
magnitude of his crimes, forgotten how his greasy
black hair hung in curtains around his thin face, how
his black eyes had a dead, cold look. He was not
wearing nightclothes, but was dressed in his usual
black cloak, and he too was holding his wand ready
for a fight.
“Where are the Carrows?” he asked quietly.
“Wherever you told them to be, I expect, Severus,”
said Professor McGonagall.
Snape stepped nearer, and his eyes flitted over
Professor McGonagall into the air around her, as if he
knew that Harry was there. Harry held his wand up
too, ready to attack.
“I was under the impression,” said Snape, “that Alecto
had apprehended an intruder.”
“Really?” said Professor McGonagall. “And what gave
you that impression?”
Snape made a slight flexing movement of his left arm,
where the Dark Mark was branded into his skin.
 
“Oh, but naturally,” said Professor McGonagall. “You
Death Eaters have your own private means of
communication, I forgot.”
Snape pretended not to have heard her. His eyes were
still probing the air all about her, and he was moving
gradually closer, with an air of hardly noticing what
he was doing.
“I did not know that it was your night to patrol the
corridors, Minerva.”
“You have some objection?”
“I wonder what could have brought you out of your
bed at this late hour?”
“I thought I heard a disturbance,” said Professor
McGonagall.
“Really? But all seems calm.”
Snape looked into her eyes.
“Have you seen Harry Potter, Minerva? Because if you
have, I must insist — ”
Professor McGonagall moved faster than Harry could
have believed: Her wand slashed through the air and
for a split second Harry thought that Snape must
crumple, unconscious, but the swiftness of his Shield
Charm was such that McGonagall was thrown off
balance. She brandished her wand at a torch on the
wall and it flew out of its bracket: Harry, about to
curse Snape, was forced to pull Luna out of the way
of the descending flames, which became a ring of fire
that filled the corridor and flew like a lasso at Snape
 
Then it was no longer fire, but a great black serpent
that McGonagall blasted to smoke, which re-formed
and solidified in seconds to become a swarm of
pursuing daggers: Snape avoided them only by
forcing the suit of armor in front of him, and with
echoing clangs the daggers sank, one after another,
into its breast —
“Minerva!” said a squeaky voice, and looking behind
him, still shielding Luna from flying spells, Harry saw
Professors Flitwick and Sprout sprinting up the
corridor toward them in their nightclothes, with the
enormous Professor Slughorn panting along at the
rear.
“No!” squealed Flitwick, raising his wand. “You’ll do
no more murder at Hogwarts!”
Flitwick’s spell hit the suit of armor behind which
Snape had taken shelter: With a clatter it came to life.
Snape struggled free of the crushing arms and sent it
flying back toward his attackers: Harry and Luna had
to dive sideways to avoid it as it smashed into the wall
and shattered. When Harry looked up again, Snape
was in full flight, McGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout all
thundering after him: He hurtled through a classroom
door and, moments later, he heard McGonagall cry,
“Coward! COWARD !”
“What’s happened, what’s happened?” asked Luna.
Harry dragged her to her feet and they raced along
the corridor, trailing the Invisibility Cloak behind
them, into the deserted classroom where Professors
McGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout were standing at a
smashed window.
“He jumped,” said Professor McGonagall as Harry and
Luna ran into the room.
 
“You mean he’s dead?” Harry sprinted to the window,
ignoring Flitwick’s and Sprout’s yells of shock at his
sudden appearance.
“No, he’s not dead,” said McGonagall bitterly. “Unlike
Dumbledore, he was still carrying a wand ... and he
seems to have learned a few tricks from his master.”
With a tingle of horror, Harry saw in the distance a
huge, batlike shape flying through the darkness
toward the perimeter wall.
There were heavy footfalls behind them, and a great
deal of puffing: Slughorn had just caught up.
“Harry!” he panted, massaging his immense chest
beneath his emerald-green silk pajamas. “My dear
boy ... what a surprise ... Minerva, do please explain.
... Severus ... what ... ?”
“Our headmaster is taking a short break,” said
Professor McGonagall, pointing at the Snape-shaped
hole in the window.
“Professor!” Harry shouted, his hands at his forehead.
He could see the Inferi-filled lake sliding beneath him,
and he felt the ghostly green boat bump into the
underground shore, and Voldemort leapt from it with
murder in his heart —
“Professor, we’ve got to barricade the school, he’s
coming now!”
“Very well. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is coming,”
she told the other teachers. Sprout and Flitwick
gasped; Slughorn let out a low groan. “Potter has
work to do in the castle on Dumbledore’s orders. We
need to put in place every protection of which we are
capable while Potter does what he needs to do.”
 
“You realize, of course, that nothing we do will be able
to keep out You-Know-Who indefinitely?” squeaked
Flitwick.
“But we can hold him up,” said Professor Sprout.
“Thank you, Pomona,” said Professor McGonagall,
and between the two witches there passed a look of
grim understanding. “I suggest we establish basic
protection around the place, then gather our students
and meet in the Great Hall. Most must be evacuated,
though if any of those who are over age wish to stay
and fight, I think they ought to be given the chance.”
“Agreed,” said Professor Sprout, already hurrying
toward the door. “I shall meet you in the Great Hall in
twenty minutes with my House.”
And as she jogged out of sight, they could hear her
muttering, “Tentacula. Devil’s Snare. And Snargaluff
pods ... yes, I’d like to see the Death Eaters fighting
those.”
“I can act from here,” said Flitwick, and although he
could barely see out of it, he pointed his wand
through the smashed window and started muttering
incantations of great complexity. Harry heard a weird
rushing noise, as though Flitwick had unleashed the
power of the wind into the grounds.
“Professor,” Harry said, approaching the little Charms
master, “Professor, I’m sorry to interrupt, but this is
important. Have you got any idea where the diadem of
Ravenclaw is?”
“ — Protego Horribilis — the diadem of Ravenclaw?”
squeaked Flitwick. “A little extra wisdom never goes
amiss, Potter, but I hardly think it would be much
use in this situation!”
 
“I only meant — do you know where it is? Have you
ever seen it?”
“Seen it? Nobody has seen it in living memory! Long
since lost, boy!”
Harry felt a mixture of desperate disappointment and
panic. What, then, was the Horcrux?
“We shall meet you and your Ravenclaws in the Great
Hall, Filius!” said Professor McGonagall, beckoning to
Harry and Luna to follow her.
They had just reached the door when Slughorn
rumbled into speech.
“My word,” he puffed, pale and sweaty, his walrus
mustache aquiver. “What a to-do! I’m not at all sure
whether this is wise, Minerva. He is bound to find a
way in, you know, and anyone who has tried to delay
him will be in most grievous peril — ”
“I shall expect you and the Slytherins in the Great
Hall in twenty minutes, also,” said Professor
McGonagall. “If you wish to leave with your students,
we shall not stop you. But if any of you attempt to
sabotage our resistance or take up arms against us
within this castle, then, Horace, we duel to kill.”
“Minerva!” he said, aghast.
“The time has come for Slytherin House to decide
upon its loyalties,” interrupted Professor McGonagall.
“Go and wake your students, Horace.”
Harry did not stay to watch Slughorn splutter: He and
Luna ran after Professor McGonagall, who had taken
up a position in the middle of the corridor and raised
her wand.
 
“Piertotum — oh, for heaven’s sake, Filch, not now — ”
The aged caretaker had just come hobbling into view,
shouting, “Students out of bed! Students in the
corridors!”
“They’re supposed to be, you blithering idiot!” shouted
McGonagall. “Now go and do something constructive!
Find Peeves!”
“P-Peeves?” stammered Filch as though he had never
heard the name before.
“Yes, Peeves, you fool, Peevesl Haven’t you been
complaining about him for a quarter of a century? Go
and fetch him, at once!”
Filch evidently thought Professor McGonagall had
taken leave of her senses, but hobbled away, hunch-
shouldered, muttering under his breath.
“And now — Piertotum Locomotori” cried Professor
McGonagall.
And all along the corridor the statues and suits of
armor jumped down from their plinths, and from the
echoing crashes from the floors above and below,
Harry knew that their fellows throughout the castle
had done the same.
“Hogwarts is threatened!” shouted Professor
McGonagall. “Man the boundaries, protect us, do
your duty to our school!”
Clattering and yelling, the horde of moving statues
stampeded past Harry: some of them smaller, others
larger, than life. There were animals too, and the
clanking suits of armor brandished swords and
spiked balls on chains.
 
“Now, Potter,” said McGonagall, “you and Miss
Lovegood had better return to your friends and bring
them to the Great Hall — I shall rouse the other
Gryffindors.”
They parted at the top of the next staircase, Harry
and Luna running back toward the concealed
entrance to the Room of Requirement. As they ran,
they met crowds of students, most wearing traveling
cloaks over their pajamas, being shepherded down to
the Great Hall by teachers and prefects.
“That was Potter!”
“ Harry Potted”
“It was him, I swear, I just saw him!”
But Harry did not look back, and at last they reached
the entrance to the Room of Requirement. Harry
leaned against the enchanted wall, which opened to
admit them, and he and Luna sped back down the
steep staircase.
“Wh — ?”
As the room came into view, Harry slipped down a few
stairs in shock. It was packed, far more crowded than
when he had last been in there. Kingsley and Lupin
were looking up at him, as were Oliver Wood, Katie
Bell, Angelina Johnson and Alicia Spinnet, Bill and
Fleur, and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley.
“Harry, what’s happening?” said Lupin, meeting him
at the foot of the stairs.
“Voldemort’s on his way, they’re barricading the
school — Snape’s run for it — What are you doing
here? How did you know?”
 
“We sent messages to the rest of Dumbledore’s Army,”
Fred explained. “You couldn’t expect everyone to miss
the fun, Harry, and the D.A. let the Order of the
Phoenix know, and it all kind of snowballed.”
“What first, Harry?” called George. “What’s going on?”
“They’re evacuating the younger kids and everyone’s
meeting in the Great Hall to get organized,” Harry
said. “We’re fighting.”
There was a great roar and a surge toward the foot of
the stairs; he was pressed back against the wall as
they ran past him, the mingled members of the Order
of the Phoenix, Dumbledore’s Army, and Harry’s old
Quidditch team, all with their wands drawn, heading
up into the main castle.
“Come on, Luna,” Dean called as he passed, holding
out his free hand; she took it and followed him back
up the stairs.
The crowd was thinning: Only a little knot of people
remained below in the Room of Requirement, and
Harry joined them. Mrs. Weasley was struggling with
Ginny. Around them stood Lupin, Fred, George, Bill,
and Fleur.
“You’re underage!” Mrs. Weasley shouted at her
daughter as Harry approached. “I won’t permit it! The
boys, yes, but you, you’ve got to go home!”
“I won’t!”
Ginny’s hair flew as she pulled her arm out of her
mother’s grip.
“I’m in Dumbledore’s Army — ”
 
“A teenagers’ gang!”
“A teenagers’ gang that’s about to take him on, which
no one else has dared to do!” said Fred.
“She’s sixteen!” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “She’s not old
enough! What you two were thinking, bringing her
with you — ”
Fred and George looked slightly ashamed of
themselves.
“Mum’s right, Ginny,” said Bill gently. “You can’t do
this. Everyone underage will have to leave, it’s only
right.”
“I can’t go home!” Ginny shouted, angry tears
sparkling in her eyes. “My whole family’s here, I can’t
stand waiting there alone and not knowing and — ”
Her eyes met Harry’s for the first time. She looked at
him beseechingly, but he shook his head and she
turned away bitterly.
“Fine,” she said, staring at the entrance to the tunnel
back to the Hog’s Head. “I’ll say good-bye now, then,
and—”
There was a scuffling and a great thump: Someone
else had clambered out of the tunnel, overbalanced
slightly, and fallen. He pulled himself up on the
nearest chair, looked around through lopsided horn-
rimmed glasses, and said, “Am I too late? Has it
started? I only just found out, so I — I — ”
Percy spluttered into silence. Evidently he had not
expected to run into most of his family. There was a
long moment of astonishment, broken by Fleur
turning to Lupin and saying, in a wildly transparent
 
attempt to break the tension, “So — ’ow eez leetle
Teddy?”
Lupin blinked at her, startled. The silence between
the Weasleys seemed to be solidifying, like ice.
“I — oh yes — he’s fine!” Lupin said loudly. “Yes,
Tonks is with him — at her mother’s — ”
Percy and the other Weasleys were still staring at one
another, frozen.
“Here, I’ve got a picture!” Lupin shouted, pulling a
photograph from inside his jacket and showing it to
Fleur and Harry, who saw a tiny baby with a tuft of
bright turquoise hair, waving fat fists at the camera.
“I was a fool!” Percy roared, so loudly that Lupin
nearly dropped his photograph. “I was an idiot, I was
a pompous prat, I was a — a — ”
“Ministry-loving, family-disowning, power-hungry
moron,” said Fred.
Percy swallowed.
“Yes, I was!”
“Well, you can’t say fairer than that,” said Fred,
holding out his hand to Percy.
Mrs. Weasley burst into tears. She ran forward,
pushed Fred aside, and pulled Percy into a strangling
hug, while he patted her on the back, his eyes on his
father.
“I’m sorry, Dad,” Percy said.
 
Mr. Weasley blinked rather rapidly, then he too
hurried to hug his son.
“What made you see sense, Perce?” inquired George.
“It’s been coming on for a while,” said Percy, mopping
his eyes under his glasses with a corner of his
traveling cloak. “But I had to find a way out and it’s
not so easy at the Ministry, they’re imprisoning
traitors all the time. I managed to make contact with
Aberforth and he tipped me off ten minutes ago that
Hogwarts was going to make a fight of it, so here I
am.”
“Well, we do look to our prefects to take a lead at
times such as these,” said George in a good imitation
of Percy’s most pompous manner. “Now let’s get
upstairs and fight, or all the good Death Eaters’ll be
taken.”
“So, you’re my sister-in-law now?” said Percy, shaking
hands with Fleur as they hurried off toward the
staircase with Bill, Fred, and George.
“Ginny!” barked Mrs. Weasley.
Ginny had been attempting, under cover of the
reconciliation, to sneak upstairs too.
“Molly, how about this,” said Lupin. “Why doesn’t
Ginny stay here, then at least she’ll be on the scene
and know what’s going on, but she won’t be in the
middle of the fighting?”
“That’s a good idea,” said Mr. Weasley firmly. “Ginny,
you stay in this room, you hear me?”
 
Ginny did not seem to like the idea much, but under
her father’s unusually stern gaze, she nodded. Mr.
and Mrs. Weasley and Lupin headed off for the stairs
as well.
“Where’s Ron?” asked Harry. “Where’s Hermione?”
“They must have gone up to the Great Hall already,”
Mr. Weasley called over his shoulder.
“I didn’t see them pass me,” said Harry.
“They said something about a bathroom,” said Ginny,
“not long after you left.”
“A bathroom?”
Harry strode across the room to an open door leading
off the Room of Requirement and checked the
bathroom beyond. It was empty.
“You’re sure they said bath — ?”
But then his scar seared and the Room of
Requirement vanished: He was looking through the
high wrought-iron gates with winged boars on pillars
at either side, looking through the dark grounds
toward the castle, which was ablaze with lights.
Nagini lay draped over his shoulders. He was
possessed of that cold, cruel sense of purpose that
preceded murder.
 
THE BATTLE OF HOGWARTS
The enchanted ceiling of the Great Hall was dark and
scattered with stars, and below it the four long House
tables were lined with disheveled students, some in
traveling cloaks, others in dressing gowns. Here and
there shone the pearly white figures of the school
ghosts. Every eye, living and dead, was fixed upon
Professor McGonagall, who was speaking from the
raised platform at the top of the Hall. Behind her
stood the remaining teachers, including the palomino
centaur, Firenze, and the members of the Order of the
Phoenix who had arrived to fight.
"... evacuation will be overseen by Mr. Filch and
Madam Pomfrey. Prefects, when I give the word, you
will organize your House and take your charges, in an
orderly fashion, to the evacuation point.”
Many of the students looked petrified. However, as
Harry skirted the walls, scanning the Gryffindor table
for Ron and Hermione, Ernie Macmillan stood up at
the Hufflepuff table and shouted, “And what if we
want to stay and fight?”
 
There was a smattering of applause.
“If you are of age, you may stay,” said Professor
McGonagall.
“What about our things?” called a girl at the
Ravenclaw table. “Our trunks, our owls?”
“We have no time to collect possessions,” said
Professor McGonagall. “The important thing is to get
you out of here safely.”
“Where’s Professor Snape?” shouted a girl from the
Slytherin table.
“He has, to use the common phrase, done a bunk,”
replied Professor McGonagall, and a great cheer
erupted from the Gryffindors, Hufflepuffs, and
Ravenclaws.
Harry moved up the Hall alongside the Gryffindor
table, still looking for Ron and Hermione. As he
passed, faces turned in his direction, and a great deal
of whispering broke out in his wake.
“We have already placed protection around the
castle,” Professor McGonagall was saying, “but it is
unlikely to hold for very long unless we reinforce it. I
must ask you, therefore, to move quickly and calmly,
and do as your prefects — ”
But her final words were drowned as a different voice
echoed throughout the Hall. It was high, cold, and
clear: There was no telling from where it came; it
seemed to issue from the walls themselves. Like the
monster it had once commanded, it might have lain
dormant there for centuries.
 
“I know that you are preparing to fight.” There were
screams amongst the students, some of whom
clutched each other, looking around in terror for the
source of the sound. “Your efforts are futile. You
cannot fight me. I do not want to kill you. I have great
respect for the teachers of Hogwarts. I do not want to
spill magical blood.”
There was silence in the Hall now, the kind of silence
that presses against the eardrums, that seems too
huge to be contained by walls.
“Give me Harry Potter,” said Voldemort’s voice, “and
none shall be harmed. Give me Harry Potter, and I
shall leave the school untouched. Give me Harry
Potter, and you will be rewarded.
“You have until midnight.”
The silence swallowed them all again. Every head
turned, every eye in the place seemed to have found
Harry, to hold him frozen in the glare of thousands of
invisible beams. Then a figure rose from the Slytherin
table and he recognized Pansy Parkinson as she
raised a shaking arm and screamed, “But he’s there!
Potter’s there\ Someone grab him!”
Before Harry could speak, there was a massive
movement. The Gryffindors in front of him had risen
and stood facing, not Harry, but the Slytherins. Then
the Hufflepuffs stood, and almost at the same
moment, the Ravenclaws, all of them with their backs
to Harry, all of them looking toward Pansy instead,
and Harry, awestruck and overwhelmed, saw wands
emerging everywhere, pulled from beneath cloaks and
from under sleeves.
“Thank you, Miss Parkinson,” said Professor
McGonagall in a clipped voice. “You will leave the Hall
 
first with Mr. Filch. If the rest of your House could
follow.”
Harry heard the grinding of benches and then the
sound of the Slytherins trooping out on the other side
of the Hall.
“Ravenclaws, follow on!” cried Professor McGonagall.
Slowly the four tables emptied. The Slytherin table
was completely deserted, but a number of older
Ravenclaws remained seated while their fellows filed
out; even more Hufflepuffs stayed behind, and half of
Gryffindor remained in their seats, necessitating
Professor McGonagall’s descent from the teachers’
platform to chivvy the underage on their way.
“Absolutely not, Creevey, go! And you, Peakes!”
Harry hurried over to the Weasleys, all sitting
together at the Gryffindor table.
“Where are Ron and Hermione?”
“Haven’t you found — ?” began Mr. Weasley, looking
worried.
But he broke off as Kingsley had stepped forward on
the raised platform to address those who had
remained behind.
“We’ve only got half an hour until midnight, so we
need to act fast! A battle plan has been agreed
between the teachers of Hogwarts and the Order of
the Phoenix. Professors Flitwick, Sprout, and
McGonagall are going to take groups of fighters up to
the three highest towers — Ravenclaw, Astronomy,
and Gryffindor — where they’ll have a good overview,
excellent positions from which to work spells.
 
Meanwhile Remus” — he indicated Lupin — “Arthur”
— he pointed toward Mr. Weasley, sitting at the
Gryffindor table — “and I will take groups into the
grounds. We’ll need somebody to organize defense of
the entrances of the passageways into the school — ”
“Sounds like a job for us,” called Fred, indicating
himself and George, and Kingsley nodded his
approval.
“All right, leaders up here and we’ll divide up the
troops!”
“Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, hurrying up to
him, as students flooded the platform, jostling for
position, receiving instructions, “ Aren’t you supposed
to be looking for something?”
“What? Oh,” said Harry, “oh yeah!”
He had almost forgotten about the Horcrux, almost
forgotten that the battle was being fought so that he
could search for it: The inexplicable absence of Ron
and Hermione had momentarily driven every other
thought from his mind.
“Then go, Potter, go!”
“Right — yeah — ”
He sensed eyes following him as he ran out of the
Great Hall again, into the entrance hall still crowded
with evacuating students. He allowed himself to be
swept up the marble staircase with them, but at the
top he hurried off along a deserted corridor. Fear and
panic were clouding his thought processes. He tried
to calm himself, to concentrate on finding the
Horcrux, but his thoughts buzzed as frantically and
fruitlessly as wasps trapped beneath a glass. Without
 
Ron and Hermione to help him he could not seem to
marshal his ideas. He slowed down, coming to a halt
halfway along an empty passage, where he sat down
upon the plinth of a departed statue and pulled the
Marauder’s Map out of the pouch around his neck.
He could not see Ron’s or Hermione’s names
anywhere on it, though the density of the crowd of
dots now making its way to the Room of Requirement
might, he thought, be concealing them. He put the
map away, pressed his hands over his face, and
closed his eyes, trying to concentrate. ...
Voldemort thought I’d go to Ravenclaw Tower.
There it was: a solid fact, the place to start. Voldemort
had stationed Alecto Carrow in the Ravenclaw
common room, and there could only be one
explanation: Voldemort feared that Harry already
knew his Horcrux was connected to that House.
But the only object anyone seemed to associate with
Ravenclaw was the lost diadem . . . and how could the
Horcrux be the diadem? How was it possible that
Voldemort, the Slytherin, had found the diadem that
had eluded generations of Ravenclaws? Who could
have told him where to look, when nobody had seen
the diadem in living memory?
In living memory ...
Beneath his fingers, Harry’s eyes flew open again. He
leapt up from the plinth and tore back the way he had
come, now in pursuit of his one last hope. The sound
of hundreds of people marching toward the Room of
Requirement grew louder and louder as he returned
to the marble stairs. Prefects were shouting
instructions, trying to keep track of the students in
their own Houses; there was much pushing and
shoving; Harry saw Zacharias Smith bowling over
 
first-years to get to the front of the queue; here and
there younger students were in tears, while older ones
called desperately for friends or siblings. ...
Harry caught sight of a pearly white figure drifting
across the entrance hall below and yelled as loudly as
he could over the clamor.
“Nick! NICK! I need to talk to you!”
He forced his way back through the tide of students,
finally reaching the bottom of the stairs, where Nearly
Headless Nick, ghost of Gryffindor Tower, stood
waiting for him.
“Harry! My dear boy!”
Nick made to grasp Harry’s hands with both of his
own: Harry’s felt as though they had been thrust into
icy water.
“Nick, you’ve got to help me. Who’s the ghost of
Ravenclaw Tower?”
Nearly Headless Nick looked surprised and a little
offended.
“The Gray Lady, of course; but if it is ghostly services
you require — ?”
“It’s got to be her — d’you know where she is?”
“Let’s see. ...”
Nick’s head wobbled a little on his ruff as he turned
hither and thither, peering over the heads of the
swarming students.
 
“That’s her over there, Harry, the young woman with
the long hair.”
Harry looked in the direction of Nick’s transparent,
pointing finger and saw a tall ghost who caught sight
of Harry looking at her, raised her eyebrows, and
drifted away through a solid wall.
Harry ran after her. Once through the door of the
corridor into which she had disappeared, he saw her
at the very end of the passage, still gliding smoothly
away from him.
“Hey — wait — come back!”
She consented to pause, floating a few inches from
the ground. Harry supposed that she was beautiful,
with her waist-length hair and floor-length cloak, but
she also looked haughty and proud. Close to, he
recognized her as a ghost he had passed several times
in the corridor, but to whom he had never spoken.
“You’re the Gray Lady?”
She nodded but did not speak.
“The ghost of Ravenclaw Tower?”
“That is correct.”
Her tone was not encouraging.
“Please: I need some help. I need to know anything
you can tell me about the lost diadem.”
A cold smile curved her lips.
“I am afraid,” she said, turning to leave, “that I cannot
help you.”
 
“WAIT!”
He had not meant to shout, but anger and panic were
threatening to overwhelm him. He glanced at his
watch as she hovered in front of him: It was a quarter
to midnight.
“This is urgent,” he said fiercely. “If that diadem’s at
Hogwarts, I’ve got to find it, fast.”
“You are hardly the first student to covet the diadem,”
she said disdainfully. “Generations of students have
badgered me — ”
“This isn’t about trying to get better marks!” Harry
shouted at her. “It’s about Voldemort — defeating
Voldemort — or aren’t you interested in that?”
She could not blush, but her transparent cheeks
became more opaque, and her voice was heated as
she replied, “Of course I — how dare you suggest — ?”
“Well, help me, then!”
Her composure was slipping.
“It — it is not a question of — ” she stammered. “My
mother’s diadem — ”
“Your mother’s?”
She looked angry with herself.
“When I lived,” she said stiffly, “I was Helena
Ravenclaw.”
“You’re her daughter? But then, you must know what
happened to it!”
 
“While the diadem bestows wisdom,” she said with an
obvious effort to pull herself together, “I doubt that it
would greatly increase your chances of defeating the
wizard who calls himself Lord — ”
“Haven’t I just told you, I’m not interested in wearing
it!” Harry said fiercely. “There’s no time to explain —
but if you care about Hogwarts, if you want to see
Voldemort finished, you’ve got to tell me anything you
know about the diadem!”
She remained quite still, floating in midair, staring
down at him, and a sense of hopelessness engulfed
Harry. Of course, if she had known anything, she
would have told Flitwick or Dumbledore, who had
surely asked her the same question. He had shaken
his head and made to turn away when she spoke in a
low voice.
“I stole the diadem from my mother.”
“You — you did what?”
“ I stole the diadem,” repeated Helena Ravenclaw in a
whisper. “I sought to make myself cleverer, more
important than my mother. I ran away with it.”
He did not know how he had managed to gain her
confidence, and did not ask; he simply listened, hard,
as she went on:
“My mother, they say, never admitted that the diadem
was gone, but pretended that she had it still. She
concealed her loss, my dreadful betrayal, even from
the other founders of Hogwarts.
“Then my mother fell ill — fatally ill. In spite of my
perfidy, she was desperate to see me one more time.
She sent a man who had long loved me, though I
 
spurned his advances, to find me. She knew that he
would not rest until he had done so.”
Harry waited. She drew a deep breath and threw back
her head.
“He tracked me to the forest where I was hiding.
When I refused to return with him, he became violent.
The Baron was always a hot-tempered man. Furious
at my refusal, jealous of my freedom, he stabbed me.”
“The Baron? You mean — ?”
“The Bloody Baron, yes,” said the Gray Lady, and she
lifted aside the cloak she wore to reveal a single dark
wound in her white chest. “When he saw what he had
done, he was overcome with remorse. He took the
weapon that had claimed my life, and used it to kill
himself. All these centuries later, he wears his chains
as an act of penitence ... as he should,” she added
bitterly.
“And . . . and the diadem?”
“It remained where I had hidden it when I heard the
Baron blundering through the forest toward me.
Concealed inside a hollow tree.
“A hollow tree?” repeated Harry. “What tree? Where
was this?”
“A forest in Albania. A lonely place I thought was far
beyond my mother’s reach.”
“Albania,” repeated Harry. Sense was emerging
miraculously from confusion, and now he understood
why she was telling him what she had denied
Dumbledore and Flitwick. “You’ve already told
someone this story, haven’t you? Another student?”
 
She closed her eyes and nodded.
“I had ... no idea. . . . He was . . . flattering. He seemed
to ... to understand ... to sympathize. ...”
Yes, Harry thought, Tom Riddle would certainly have
understood Helena Ravenclaw’s desire to possess
fabulous objects to which she had little right.
“Well, you weren’t the first person Riddle wormed
things out of,” Harry muttered. “He could be
charming when he wanted. ...”
So Voldemort had managed to wheedle the location of
the lost diadem out of the Gray Lady. He had traveled
to that far-flung forest and retrieved the diadem from
its hiding place, perhaps as soon as he left Hogwarts,
before he even started work at Borgin and Burkes.
And wouldn’t those secluded Albanian woods have
seemed an excellent refuge when, so much later,
Voldemort had needed a place to lie low, undisturbed,
for ten long years?
But the diadem, once it became his precious Horcrux,
had not been left in that lowly tree. ... No, the diadem
had been returned secretly to its true home, and
Voldemort must have put it there —
“ — the night he asked for a job!” said Harry, finishing
his thought.
“I beg your pardon?”
“He hid the diadem in the castle, the night he asked
Dumbledore to let him teach!” said Harry. Saying it
out loud enabled him to make sense of it all. “He
must’ve hidden the diadem on his way up to, or down
from, Dumbledore ’s office! But it was still worth trying
 
to get the job — then he might’ve got the chance to
nick Gryffindor’s sword as well — thank you, thanks!”
Harry left her floating there, looking utterly
bewildered. As he rounded the corner back into the
entrance hall, he checked his watch. It was five
minutes until midnight, and though he now knew
what the last Horcrux was, he was no closer to
discovering where it was. ...
Generations of students had failed to find the diadem;
that suggested that it was not in Ravenclaw Tower —
but if not there, where? What hiding place had Tom
Riddle discovered inside Hogwarts Castle, that he
believed would remain secret forever?
Lost in desperate speculation, Harry turned a corner,
but he had taken only a few steps down the new
corridor when the window to his left broke open with
a deafening, shattering crash. As he leapt aside, a
gigantic body flew in through the window and hit the
opposite wall. Something large and furry detached
itself, whimpering, from the new arrival and flung
itself at Harry.
“Hagrid!” Harry bellowed, fighting off Fang the
boarhound’s attentions as the enormous bearded
figure clambered to his feet. “What the — ?”
“Harry, yer here! Yer here\”
Hagrid stooped down, bestowed upon Harry a cursory
and rib-cracking hug, then ran back to the shattered
window.
“Good boy, Grawpy!” he bellowed through the hole in
the window. “I’ll see yer in a moment, there’s a good
lad!”
 
Beyond Hagrid, out in the dark night, Harry saw
bursts of light in the distance and heard a weird,
keening scream. He looked down at his watch: It was
midnight. The battle had begun.
“Blimey, Harry,” panted Hagrid, “this is it, eh? Time
ter fight?”
“Hagrid, where have you come from?”
“Heard You-Know-Who from up in our cave,” said
Hagrid grimly. “Voice carried, didn’ it? Yeh got till
midnight ter gimme Potter.’ Knew yeh mus’ be here,
knew what mus’ be happenin’. Get down, Fang. So we
come ter join in, me an’ Grawpy an’ Fang. Smashed
our way through the boundary by the forest, Grawpy
was carryin’ us, Fang an’ me. Told him ter let me
down at the castle, so he shoved me through the
window, bless him. Not exac’ly what I meant, bu’ —
where’s Ron an’ Hermione?”
“That,” said Harry, “is a really good question. Come
on.”
They hurried together along the corridor, Fang
lolloping beside them. Harry could hear movement
through the corridors all around: running footsteps,
shouts; through the windows, he could see more
flashes of light in the dark grounds.
“Where’re we goin’?” puffed Hagrid, pounding along at
Harry’s heels, making the floorboards quake.
“I dunno exactly,” said Harry, making another
random turn, “but Ron and Hermione must be
around here somewhere. ...”
The first casualties of the battle were already strewn
across the passage ahead: The two stone gargoyles
 
that usually guarded the entrance to the staffroom
had been smashed apart by a jinx that had sailed
through another broken window. Their remains
stirred feebly on the floor, and as Harry leapt over one
of their disembodied heads, it moaned faintly, “Oh,
don’t mind me ... I’ll just lie here and crumble. ...”
Its ugly stone face made Harry think suddenly of the
marble bust of Rowena Ravenclaw at Xenophilius’s
house, wearing that mad headdress — and then of
the statue in Ravenclaw Tower, with the stone diadem
upon her white curls. ...
And as he reached the end of the passage, the
memory of a third stone effigy came back to him: that
of an ugly old warlock, onto whose head Harry
himself had placed a wig and a battered old tiara. The
shock shot through Harry with the heat of firewhisky,
and he nearly stumbled.
He knew, at last, where the Horcrux sat waiting for
him. ...
Tom Riddle, who confided in no one and operated
alone, might have been arrogant enough to assume
that he, and only he, had penetrated the deepest
mysteries of Hogwarts Castle. Of course, Dumbledore
and Flitwick, those model pupils, had never set foot in
that particular place, but he, Harry, had strayed off
the beaten track in his time at school — here at last
was a secret he and Voldemort knew, that
Dumbledore had never discovered —
He was roused by Professor Sprout, who was
thundering past followed by Neville and half a dozen
others, all of them wearing earmuffs and carrying
what appeared to be large potted plants.
 
“Mandrakes!” Neville bellowed at Harry over his
shoulder as he ran. “Going to lob them over the walls
— they won’t like this!”
Harry knew now where to go: He sped off, with Hagrid
and Fang galloping behind him. They passed portrait
after portrait, and the painted figures raced alongside
them, wizards and witches in ruffs and breeches, in
armor and cloaks, cramming themselves into each
others’ canvases, screaming news from other parts of
the castle. As they reached the end of this corridor,
the whole castle shook, and Harry knew, as a gigantic
vase blew off its plinth with explosive force, that it
was in the grip of enchantments more sinister than
those of the teachers and the Order.
“It’s all righ’, Fang — it’s all righ’!” yelled Hagrid, but
the great boarhound had taken flight as slivers of
china flew like shrapnel through the air, and Hagrid
pounded off after the terrified dog, leaving Harry
alone.
He forged on through the trembling passages, his
wand at the ready, and for the length of one corridor
the little painted knight, Sir Cadogan, rushed from
painting to painting beside him, clanking along in his
armor, screaming encouragement, his fat little pony
cantering behind him.
“Braggarts and rogues, dogs and scoundrels, drive
them out, Harry Potter, see them off!”
Harry hurtled around a corner and found Fred and a
small knot of students, including Lee Jordan and
Hannah Abbott, standing beside another empty
plinth, whose statue had concealed a secret
passageway. Their wands were drawn and they were
listening at the concealed hole.
 
“Nice night for it!” Fred shouted as the castle quaked
again, and Harry sprinted by, elated and terrified in
equal measure. Along yet another corridor he dashed,
and then there were owls everywhere, and Mrs. Norris
was hissing and trying to bat them with her paws, no
doubt to return them to their proper place. ...
“Potter!”
Aberforth Dumbledore stood blocking the corridor
ahead, his wand held ready.
“I’ve had hundreds of kids thundering through my
pub, Potter!”
“I know, we’re evacuating,” Harry said, “Voldemort’s
“ — attacking because they haven’t handed you over,
yeah,” said Aberforth, “I’m not deaf, the whole of
Hogsmeade heard him. And it never occurred to any
of you to keep a few Slytherins hostage? There are
kids of Death Eaters you’ve just sent to safety.
Wouldn’t it have been a bit smarter to keep ’em here?”
“It wouldn’t stop Voldemort,” said Harry, “and your
brother would never have done it.”
Aberforth grunted and tore away in the opposite
direction.
Your brother would never have done it. ... Well, it was
the truth, Harry thought as he ran on again;
Dumbledore, who had defended Snape for so long,
would never have held students ransom. ...
And then he skidded around a final corner and with a
yell of mingled relief and fury he saw them: Ron and
Hermione, both with their arms full of large, curved,
 
dirty yellow objects, Ron with a broomstick under his
arm.
“Where the hell have you been?” Harry shouted.
“Chamber of Secrets,” said Ron.
“Chamber — what?” said Harry, coming to an
unsteady halt before them.
“It was Ron, all Ron’s idea!” said Hermione
breathlessly. “Wasn’t it absolutely brilliant? There we
were, after you left, and I said to Ron, even if we find
the other one, how are we going to get rid of it? We
still hadn’t got rid of the cup! And then he thought of
it! The basilisk!”
“What the — ?”
“Something to get rid of Horcruxes,” said Ron simply.
Harry’s eyes dropped to the objects clutched in Ron
and Hermione’s arms: great curved fangs, torn, he
now realized, from the skull of a dead basilisk.
“But how did you get in there?” he asked, staring
from the fangs to Ron. “You need to speak
Parseltongue!”
“He did!” whispered Hermione. “Show him, Ron!”
Ron made a horrible strangled hissing noise.
“It’s what you did to open the locket,” he told Harry
apologetically. “I had to have a few goes to get it right,
but,” he shrugged modestly, “we got there in the end.”
“He was amazing.” said Hermione. “Amazing!”
 
“So ...” Harry was struggling to keep up. “So ...”
“So we’re another Horcrux down,” said Ron, and from
under his jacket he pulled the mangled remains of
Hufflepuff’s cup. “Hermione stabbed it. Thought she
should. She hasn’t had the pleasure yet.”
“Genius!” yelled Harry.
“It was nothing,” said Ron, though he looked
delighted with himself. “So what’s new with you?”
As he said it, there was an explosion from overhead:
All three of them looked up as dust fell from the
ceiling and they heard a distant scream.
“I know what the diadem looks like, and I know where
it is,” said Harry, talking fast. “He hid it exactly where
I hid my old Potions book, where everyone’s been
hiding stuff for centuries. He thought he was the only
one to find it. Come on.”
As the walls trembled again, he led the other two back
through the concealed entrance and down the
staircase into the Room of Requirement. It was empty
except for three women: Ginny, Tonks, and an elderly
witch wearing a moth-eaten hat, whom Harry
recognized immediately as Neville’s grandmother.
“Ah, Potter,” she said crisply as if she had been
waiting for him. “You can tell us what’s going on.”
“Is everyone okay?” said Ginny and Tonks together.
“ ’S far as we know,” said Harry. “Are there still people
in the passage to the Hog’s Head?”
He knew that the room would not be able to
transform while there were still users inside it.
 
“I was the last to come through,” said Mrs.
Longbottom. “I sealed it, I think it unwise to leave it
open now Aberforth has left his pub. Have you seen
my grandson?”
“He’s fighting,” said Harry.
“Naturally,” said the old lady proudly. “Excuse me, I
must go and assist him.”
With surprising speed she trotted off toward the stone
steps.
Harry looked at Tonks.
“I thought you were supposed to be with Teddy at
your mother’s?”
“I couldn’t stand not knowing — ” Tonks looked
anguished. “She’ll look after him — have you seen
Remus?”
“He was planning to lead a group of fighters into the
grounds — ”
Without another word, Tonks sped off.
“Ginny,” said Harry, “I’m sorry, but we need you to
leave too. Just for a bit. Then you can come back in.”
Ginny looked simply delighted to leave her sanctuary.
“And then you can come back in!” he shouted after
her as she ran up the steps after Tonks. “ You’ve got to
come back ini”
“Hang on a moment!” said Ron sharply. “We’ve
forgotten someone!”
 
“Who?” asked Hermione.
“The house-elves, they’ll all be down in the kitchen,
won’t they?”
“You mean we ought to get them fighting?” asked
Harry.
“No,” said Ron seriously, “I mean we should tell them
to get out. We don’t want any more Dobbies, do we?
We can’t order them to die for us — ”
There was a clatter as the basilisk fangs cascaded out
of Hermione ’s arms. Running at Ron, she flung them
around his neck and kissed him full on the mouth.
Ron threw away the fangs and broomstick he was
holding and responded with such enthusiasm that he
lifted Hermione off her feet.
“Is this the moment?” Harry asked weakly, and when
nothing happened except that Ron and Hermione
gripped each other still more firmly and swayed on
the spot, he raised his voice. “01! There’s a war going
on here!”
Ron and Hermione broke apart, their arms still
around each other.
“I know, mate,” said Ron, who looked as though he
had recently been hit on the back of the head with a
Bludger, “so it’s now or never, isn’t it?”
“Never mind that, what about the Horcrux?” Harry
shouted. “D’you think you could just — just hold it in
until we’ve got the diadem?”
“Yeah — right — sorry — ” said Ron, and he and
Hermione set about gathering up fangs, both pink in
the face.
 
It was clear, as the three of them stepped back into
the corridor upstairs, that in the minutes that they
had spent in the Room of Requirement the situation
within the castle had deteriorated severely: The walls
and ceiling were shaking worse than ever; dust filled
the air, and through the nearest window, Harry saw
bursts of green and red light so close to the foot of the
castle that he knew the Death Eaters must be very
near to entering the place. Looking down, Harry saw
Grawp the giant meandering past, swinging what
looked like a stone gargoyle torn from the roof and
roaring his displeasure.
“Let’s hope he steps on some of them!” said Ron as
more screams echoed from close by.
“As long as it’s not any of our lot!” said a voice: Harry
turned and saw Ginny and Tonks, both with their
wands drawn at the next window, which was missing
several panes. Even as he watched, Ginny sent a well-
aimed jinx into a crowd of fighters below.
“Good girl!” roared a figure running through the dust
toward them, and Harry saw Aberforth again, his gray
hair flying as he led a small group of students past.
“They look like they might be breaching the north
battlements, they’ve brought giants of their own!”
“Have you seen Remus?” Tonks called after him.
“He was dueling Dolohov,” shouted Aberforth,
“haven’t seen him since!
“Tonks,” said Ginny, “Tonks, I’m sure he’s okay — ”
But Tonks had run off into the dust after Aberforth.
Ginny turned, helpless, to Harry, Ron, and Hermione.
 
“They’ll be all right,” said Harry, though he knew they
were empty words. “Ginny, we’ll be back in a moment,
just keep out of the way, keep safe — come on!” he
said to Ron and Hermione, and they ran back to the
stretch of wall beyond which the Room of
Requirement was waiting to do the bidding of the next
entrant.
I need the place where everything is hidden, Harry
begged of it inside his head, and the door materialized
on their third run past.
The furor of the battle died the moment they crossed
the threshold and closed the door behind them: All
was silent. They were in a place the size of a cathedral
with the appearance of a city, its towering walls built
of objects hidden by thousands of long-gone students.
“And he never realized anyone could get in?” said
Ron, his voice echoing in the silence.
“He thought he was the only one,” said Harry. “Too
bad for him I’ve had to hide stuff in my time ... this
way,” he added, “I think it’s down here. ...”
He passed the stuffed troll and the Vanishing Cabinet
Draco Malfoy had mended last year with such
disastrous consequences, then hesitated, looking up
and down aisles of junk; he could not remember
where to go next. ...
“ Accio Diadem).” cried Hermione in desperation, but
nothing flew through the air toward them. It seemed
that, like the vault at Gringotts, the room would not
yield its hidden objects that easily.
“Let’s split up,” Harry told the other two. “Look for a
stone bust of an old man wearing a wig and a tiara!
 
It’s standing on a cupboard and it’s definitely
somewhere near here. ...”
They sped off up adjacent aisles; Harry could hear the
others’ footsteps echoing through the towering piles of
junk, of bottles, hats, crates, chairs, books, weapons,
broomsticks, bats. ...
“Somewhere near here,” Harry muttered to himself.
“Somewhere ... somewhere ...”
Deeper and deeper into the labyrinth he went, looking
for objects he recognized from his one previous trip
into the room. His breath was loud in his ears, and
then his very soul seemed to shiver: There it was,
right ahead, the blistered old cupboard in which he
had hidden his old Potions book, and on top of it, the
pockmarked stone warlock wearing a dusty old wig
and what looked like an ancient, discolored tiara.
He had already stretched out his hand, though he
remained ten feet away, when a voice behind him
said, “Hold it, Potter.”
He skidded to a halt and turned around. Crabbe and
Goyle were standing behind him, shoulder to
shoulder, wands pointing right at Harry. Through the
small space between their leering faces he saw Draco
Malfoy.
“That’s my wand you’re holding, Potter,” said Malfoy,
pointing his own through the gap between Crabbe
and Goyle.
“Not anymore,” panted Harry, tightening his grip on
the hawthorn wand. “Winners, keepers, Malfoy. Who’s
lent you theirs?”
“My mother,” said Draco.
 
Harry laughed, though there was nothing very
humorous about the situation. He could not hear Ron
or Hermione anymore. They seemed to have run out
of earshot, searching for the diadem.
“So how come you three aren’t with Voldemort?”
asked Harry.
“We’re gonna be rewarded,” said Crabbe: His voice
was surprisingly soft for such an enormous person;
Harry had hardly ever heard him speak before.
Crabbe was smiling like a small child promised a
large bag of sweets. “We ’ung back, Potter. We decided
not to go. Decided to bring you to ’im.”
“Good plan,” said Harry in mock admiration. He could
not believe that he was this close, and was going to be
thwarted by Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle. He began
edging slowly backward toward the place where the
Horcrux sat lopsided upon the bust. If he could just
get his hands on it before the fight broke out . . .
“So how did you get in here?” he asked, trying to
distract them.
“I virtually lived in the Room of Hidden Things all last
year,” said Malfoy, his voice brittle. “I know how to get
in.”
“We was hiding in the corridor outside,” grunted
Goyle. “We can do Diss-lusion Charms now! And
then,” his face split into a gormless grin, “you turned
up right in front of us and said you was looking for a
die-dum! What’s a die-dum?”
“Harry?” Ron’s voice echoed suddenly from the other
side of the wall to Harry’s right. “Are you talking to
someone?”
 
With a whiplike movement, Crabbe pointed his wand
at the fifty-foot mountain of old furniture, of broken
trunks, of old books and robes and unidentifiable
junk, and shouted, “DescendoV’
The wall began to totter, then the top third crumbled
into the aisle next door where Ron stood.
“Ron!” Harry bellowed, as somewhere out of sight
Hermione screamed, and Harry heard innumerable
objects crashing to the floor on the other side of the
destabilized wall: He pointed his wand at the rampart,
cried, “Finite!” and it steadied.
“No!” shouted Malfoy, staying Crabbe’s arm as the
latter made to repeat his spell. “If you wreck the room
you might bury this diadem thing!”
“What’s that matter?” said Crabbe, tugging himself
free. “It’s Potter the Dark Lord wants, who cares
about a die-dum?”
“Potter came in here to get it,” said Malfoy with ill-
disguised impatience at the slow-wittedness of his
colleagues, “so that must mean — ”
“ ‘Must mean?” Crabbe turned on Malfoy with
undisguised ferocity. “Who cares what you think? I
don’t take your orders no more, Draco. You an’ your
dad are finished.”
“Harry?” shouted Ron again, from the other side of
the junk wall. “What’s going on?”
“Harry?” mimicked Crabbe. “What’s going — no,
Potter! Cruciol”
Harry had lunged for the tiara; Crabbe’s curse missed
him but hit the stone bust, which flew into the air;
 
the diadem soared upward and then dropped out of
sight in the mass of objects on which the bust had
rested.
“STOP!” Malfoy shouted at Crabbe, his voice echoing
through the enormous room. “The Dark Lord wants
him alive — ”
“So? I’m not killing him, am I?” yelled Crabbe,
throwing off Malfoy’s restraining arm. “But if I can, I
will, the Dark Lord wants him dead anyway, what’s
thediff— ?”
A jet of scarlet light shot past Harry by inches:
Hermione had run around the corner behind him and
sent a Stunning Spell straight at Crabbe ’s head. It
only missed because Malfoy pulled him out of the
way.
“It’s that Mudblood! Avada Kedavral”
Harry saw Hermione dive aside, and his fury that
Crabbe had aimed to kill wiped all else from his mind.
He shot a Stunning Spell at Crabbe, who lurched out
of the way, knocking Malfoy’s wand out of his hand; it
rolled out of sight beneath a mountain of broken
furniture and boxes.
“Don’t kill him! DONT KILL HIM!” Malfoy yelled at
Crabbe and Goyle, who were both aiming at Harry:
Their split second’s hesitation was all Harry needed.
“ Expelliarmusl”
Goyle ’s wand flew out of his hand and disappeared
into the bulwark of objects beside him; Goyle leapt
foolishly on the spot, trying to retrieve it; Malfoy
jumped out of range of Hermione ’s second Stunning
Spell, and Ron, appearing suddenly at the end of the
 
aisle, shot a full Body-Bind Curse at Crabbe, which
narrowly missed.
Crabbe wheeled around and screamed, “Avada
KedavraY’ again. Ron leapt out of sight to avoid the jet
of green light. The wandless Malfoy cowered behind a
three-legged wardrobe as Hermione charged toward
them, hitting Goyle with a Stunning Spell as she
came.
“It’s somewhere here!” Harry yelled at her, pointing at
the pile of junk into which the old tiara had fallen.
“Look for it while I go and help R — ”
“HARRY!” she screamed.
A roaring, billowing noise behind him gave him a
moment’s warning. He turned and saw both Ron and
Crabbe running as hard as they could up the aisle
toward them.
“Like it hot, scum?” roared Crabbe as he ran.
But he seemed to have no control over what he had
done. Flames of abnormal size were pursuing them,
licking up the sides of the junk bulwarks, which were
crumbling to soot at their touch.
“Aguamenti\” Harry bawled, but the jet of water that
soared from the tip of his wand evaporated in the air.
“RUN!”
Malfoy grabbed the Stunned Goyle and dragged him
along; Crabbe outstripped all of them, now looking
terrified; Harry, Ron, and Hermione pelted along in
his wake, and the fire pursued them. It was not
normal fire; Crabbe had used a curse of which Harry
had no knowledge: As they turned a corner the flames
 
chased them as though they were alive, sentient,
intent upon killing them. Now the fire was mutating,
forming a gigantic pack of fiery beasts: Flaming
serpents, chimaeras, and dragons rose and fell and
rose again, and the detritus of centuries on which
they were feeding was thrown up in the air into their
fanged mouths, tossed high on clawed feet, before
being consumed by the inferno.
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had vanished from view:
Harry, Ron, and Hermione stopped dead; the fiery
monsters were circling them, drawing closer and
closer, claws and horns and tails lashed, and the heat
was solid as a wall around them.
“What can we do?” Hermione screamed over the
deafening roars of the fire. “What can we do?”
“Here!”
Harry seized a pair of heavy-looking broomsticks from
the nearest pile of junk and threw one to Ron, who
pulled Hermione onto it behind him. Harry swung his
leg over the second broom and, with hard kicks to the
ground, they soared up into the air, missing by feet
the horned beak of a flaming raptor that snapped its
jaws at them. The smoke and heat were becoming
overwhelming: Below them the cursed fire was
consuming the contraband of generations of hunted
students, the guilty outcomes of a thousand banned
experiments, the secrets of the countless souls who
had sought refuge in the room. Harry could not see a
trace of Malfoy, Crabbe, or Goyle anywhere: He
swooped as low as he dared over the marauding
monsters of flame to try to find them, but there was
nothing but fire: What a terrible way to die. ... He had
never wanted this. ...
 
“Harry, let’s get out, let’s get out!” bellowed Ron,
though it was impossible to see where the door was
through the black smoke.
And then Harry heard a thin, piteous human scream
from amidst the terrible commotion, the thunder of
devouring flame.
“It’s — too — dangerous — !” Ron yelled, but Harry
wheeled in the air. His glasses giving his eyes some
small protection from the smoke, he raked the
firestorm below, seeking a sign of life, a limb or a face
that was not yet charred like wood. ...
And he saw them: Malfoy with his arms around the
unconscious Goyle, the pair of them perched on a
fragile tower of charred desks, and Harry dived.
Malfoy saw him coming and raised one arm, but even
as Harry grasped it he knew at once that it was no
good: Goyle was too heavy and Malfoy ’s hand, covered
in sweat, slid instantly out of Harry’s —
“IF WE DIE FOR THEM, I’LL KILL YOU, HARRY!”
roared Ron’s voice, and, as a great flaming chimaera
bore down upon them, he and Hermione dragged
Goyle onto their broom and rose, rolling and pitching,
into the air once more as Malfoy clambered up behind
Harry.
“The door, get to the door, the door!” screamed Malfoy
in Harry’s ear, and Harry sped up, following Ron,
Hermione, and Goyle through the billowing black
smoke, hardly able to breathe: and all around them
the last few objects unburned by the devouring flames
were flung into the air, as the creatures of the cursed
fire cast them high in celebration: cups and shields, a
sparkling necklace, and an old, discolored tiara —
 
“ What are you doing, what are you doing, the door’s
that way\” screamed Malfoy, but Harry made a
hairpin swerve and dived. The diadem seemed to fall
in slow motion, turning and glittering as it dropped
toward the maw of a yawning serpent, and then he
had it, caught it around his wrist —
Harry swerved again as the serpent lunged at him; he
soared upward and straight toward the place where,
he prayed, the door stood open: Ron, Hermione, and
Goyle had vanished; Malfoy was screaming and
holding Harry so tightly it hurt. Then, through the
smoke, Harry saw a rectangular patch on the wall
and steered the broom at it, and moments later clean
air filled his lungs and they collided with the wall in
the corridor beyond.
Malfoy fell off the broom and lay facedown, gasping,
coughing, and retching. Harry rolled over and sat up:
The door to the Room of Requirement had vanished,
and Ron and Hermione sat panting on the floor beside
Goyle, who was still unconscious.
“C-Crabbe,” choked Malfoy as soon as he could
speak. “C-Crabbe ...”
“He’s dead,” said Ron harshly.
There was silence, apart from panting and coughing.
Then a number of huge bangs shook the castle, and a
great cavalcade of transparent figures galloped past
on horses, their heads screaming with bloodlust
under their arms. Harry staggered to his feet when
the Headless Hunt had passed and looked around:
The battle was still going on all around him. He could
hear more screams than those of the retreating
ghosts. Panic flared within him.
 
“Where’s Ginny?” he said sharply. “She was here. She
was supposed to be going back into the Room of
Requirement.”
“Blimey, d’you reckon it’ll still work after that fire?”
asked Ron, but he too got to his feet, rubbing his
chest and looking left and right. “Shall we split up
and look — ?”
“No,” said Hermione, getting to her feet too. Malfoy
and Goyle remained slumped hopelessly on the
corridor floor; neither of them had wands. “Let’s stick
together. I say we go — Harry, what’s that on your
arm?”
“What? Oh yeah — ”
He pulled the diadem from his wrist and held it up. It
was still hot, blackened with soot, but as he looked at
it closely he was just able to make out the tiny words
etched upon it: WIT BEYOND MEASURE IS MAN’S
GREATEST TREASURE.
A bloodlike substance, dark and tarry, seemed to be
leaking from the diadem. Suddenly Harry felt the
thing vibrate violently, then break apart in his hands,
and as it did so, he thought he heard the faintest,
most distant scream of pain, echoing not from the
grounds or the castle, but from the thing that had
just fragmented in his fingers.
“It must have been Fiendfyre!” whimpered Hermione,
her eyes on the broken pieces.
“Sorry?”
“Fiendfyre — cursed fire — it’s one of the substances
that destroy Horcruxes, but I would never, ever have
 
dared use it, it’s so dangerous — how did Crabbe
know how to — ?”
“Must’ve learned from the Carrows,” said Harry
grimly.
“Shame he wasn’t concentrating when they
mentioned how to stop it, really,” said Ron, whose
hair, like Hermione’s, was singed, and whose face was
blackened. “If he hadn’t tried to kill us all, I’d be quite
sorry he was dead.”
“But don’t you realize?” whispered Hermione. “This
means, if we can just get the snake — ”
But she broke off as yells and shouts and the
unmistakable noises of dueling filled the corridor.
Harry looked around and his heart seemed to fail:
Death Eaters had penetrated Hogwarts. Fred and
Percy had just backed into view, both of them dueling
masked and hooded men.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione ran forward to help: Jets of
light flew in every direction and the man dueling
Percy backed off, fast: Then his hood slipped and they
saw a high forehead and streaked hair —
“Hello, Minister!” bellowed Percy, sending a neat jinx
straight at Thicknesse, who dropped his wand and
clawed at the front of his robes, apparently in awful
discomfort. “Did I mention I’m resigning?”
“You’re joking, Perce!” shouted Fred as the Death
Eater he was battling collapsed under the weight of
three separate Stunning Spells. Thicknesse had fallen
to the ground with tiny spikes erupting all over him;
he seemed to be turning into some form of sea urchin.
Fred looked at Percy with glee.
 
“You actually are joking, Perce. ... I don’t think I’ve
heard you joke since you were — ”
The air exploded. They had been grouped together,
Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, and Percy, the two
Death Eaters at their feet, one Stunned, the other
Transfigured; and in that fragment of a moment,
when danger seemed temporarily at bay, the world
was rent apart. Harry felt himself flying through the
air, and all he could do was hold as tightly as possible
to that thin stick of wood that was his one and only
weapon, and shield his head in his arms: He heard
the screams and yells of his companions without a
hope of knowing what had happened to them —
And then the world resolved itself into pain and
semidarkness: He was half buried in the wreckage of
a corridor that had been subjected to a terrible
attack. Cold air told him that the side of the castle
had been blown away, and hot stickiness on his
cheek told him that he was bleeding copiously. Then
he heard a terrible cry that pulled at his insides, that
expressed agony of a kind neither flame nor curse
could cause, and he stood up, swaying, more
frightened than he had been that day, more
frightened, perhaps, than he had been in his life. ...
And Hermione was struggling to her feet in the
wreckage, and three redheaded men were grouped on
the ground where the wall had blasted apart. Harry
grabbed Hermione ’s hand as they staggered and
stumbled over stone and wood.
“No — no — no!” someone was shouting. “No! Fred!
No!”
And Percy was shaking his brother, and Ron was
kneeling beside them, and Fred’s eyes stared without
 
seeing, the ghost of his last laugh still etched upon
his face.
 
THE ELDER WAND
The world had ended, so why had the battle not
ceased, the castle fallen silent in horror, and every
combatant laid down their arms? Harry’s mind was in
free fall, spinning out of control, unable to grasp the
impossibility, because Fred Weasley could not be
dead, the evidence of all his senses must be lying —
And then a body fell past the hole blown into the side
of the school, and curses flew in at them from the
darkness, hitting the wall behind their heads.
“Get down!” Harry shouted, as more curses flew
through the night: He and Ron had both grabbed
Hermione and pulled her to the floor, but Percy lay
across Fred’s body, shielding it from further harm,
and when Harry shouted, “Percy, come on, we’ve got
to move!” he shook his head.
“Percy!” Harry saw tear tracks streaking the grime
coating Ron’s face as he seized his elder brother’s
shoulders and pulled, but Percy would not budge.
 
“Percy, you can’t do anything for him! We’re going to
Hermione screamed, and Harry, turning, did not need
to ask why. A monstrous spider the size of a small car
was trying to climb through the huge hole in the wall:
One of Aragog’s descendants had joined the fight.
Ron and Harry shouted together; their spells collided
and the monster was blown backward, its legs jerking
horribly, and vanished into the darkness.
“It brought friends!” Harry called to the others,
glancing over the edge of the castle through the hole
in the wall the curses had blasted: More giant spiders
were climbing the side of the building, liberated from
the Forbidden Forest, into which the Death Eaters
must have penetrated. Harry fired Stunning Spells
down upon them, knocking the lead monster into its
fellows, so that they rolled back down the building
and out of sight. Then more curses came soaring over
Harry’s head, so close he felt the force of them blow
his hair.
“Let’s move, NOW!”
Pushing Hermione ahead of him with Ron, Harry
stooped to seize Fred’s body under the armpits. Percy,
realizing what Harry was trying to do, stopped
clinging to the body and helped; together, crouching
low to avoid the curses flying at them from the
grounds, they hauled Fred out of the way.
“Here,” said Harry, and they placed him in a niche
where a suit of armor had stood earlier. He could not
bear to look at Fred a second longer than he had to,
and after making sure that the body was well hidden,
he took off after Ron and Hermione. Malfoy and Goyle
had vanished, but at the end of the corridor, which
 
was now full of dust and falling masonry, glass long
gone from the windows, he saw many people running
backward and forward, whether friends or foes he
could not tell. Rounding the corner, Percy let out a
bull-like roar: “ROOKWOOD!” and sprinted off in the
direction of a tall man, who was pursuing a couple of
students.
“Harry, in here!” Hermione screamed.
She had pulled Ron behind a tapestry: They seemed
to be wrestling together, and for one mad second
Harry thought that they were embracing again; then
he saw that Hermione was trying to restrain Ron, to
stop him running after Percy.
“Listen to me — LISTEN, ROM”
“I wanna help — I wanna kill Death Eaters — ”
His face was contorted, smeared with dust and
smoke, and he was shaking with rage and grief.
“Ron, we’re the only ones who can end it! Please —
Ron — we need the snake, we’ve got to kill the snake!”
said Hermione.
But Harry knew how Ron felt: Pursuing another
Horcrux could not bring the satisfaction of revenge;
he too wanted to fight, to punish them, the people
who had killed Fred, and he wanted to find the other
Weasleys, and above all make sure, make quite sure,
that Ginny was not — but he could not permit that
idea to form in his mind —
“We will fight!” Hermione said. “We’ll have to, to reach
the snake! But let’s not lose sight now of what we’re
supposed to be d-doing! We’re the only ones who can
end it!”
 
She was crying too, and she wiped her face on her
torn and singed sleeve as she spoke, but she took
great heaving breaths to calm herself as, still keeping
a tight hold on Ron, she turned to Harry.
“You need to find out where Voldemort is, because
hell have the snake with him, won’t he? Do it, Harry
— look inside him!”
Why was it so easy? Because his scar had been
burning for hours, yearning to show him Voldemort’s
thoughts? He closed his eyes on her command, and at
once, the screams and the bangs and all the
discordant sounds of the battle were drowned until
they became distant, as though he stood far, far away
from them. ...
He was standing in the middle of a desolate but
strangely familiar room, with peeling paper on the
walls and all the windows boarded except for one. The
sounds of the assault on the castle were muffled and
distant. The single unblocked window revealed
distant bursts of light where the castle stood, but
inside the room it was dark except for a solitary oil
lamp.
He was rolling his wand between his fingers, watching
it, his thoughts on the room in the castle, the secret
room only he had ever found, the room, like the
Chamber, that you had to be clever and cunning and
inquisitive to discover. . . . He was confident that the
boy would not find the diadem . . . although
Dumbledore’s puppet had come much farther than he
had ever expected . . . too far. . . .
“My Lord,” said a voice, desperate and cracked. He
turned: There was Lucius Malfoy sitting in the
darkest corner, ragged and still bearing the marks of
the punishment he had received after the boy’s last
 
escape. One of his eyes remained closed and puffy.
“My Lord ... please ... my son ...”
“If your son is dead, Lucius, it is not my fault. He did
not come and join me, like the rest of the Slytherins.
Perhaps he has decided to befriend Harry Potter?”
“No — never,” whispered Malfoy.
“You must hope not.”
“Aren’t — aren’t you afraid, my Lord, that Potter
might die at another hand but yours?” asked Malfoy,
his voice shaking. “Wouldn’t it be ... forgive me ...
more prudent to call off this battle, enter the castle,
and seek him y-yourself?”
“Do not pretend, Lucius. You wish the battle to cease
so that you can discover what has happened to your
son. And I do not need to seek Potter. Before the night
is out, Potter will have come to find me.”
Voldemort dropped his gaze once more to the wand in
his fingers. It troubled him ... and those things that
troubled Lord Voldemort needed to be rearranged. ...
“Go and fetch Snape.”
“Snape, m-my Lord?”
“Snape. Now. I need him. There is a — service — I
require from him. Go.”
Frightened, stumbling a little through the gloom,
Lucius left the room. Voldemort continued to stand
there, twirling the wand between his fingers, staring
at it.
 
“It is the only way, Nagini,” he whispered, and he
looked around, and there was the great thick snake,
now suspended in midair, twisting gracefully within
the enchanted, protected space he had made for her,
a starry, transparent sphere somewhere between
glittering cage and tank.
With a gasp, Harry pulled back and opened his eyes;
at the same moment his ears were assaulted with the
screeches and cries, the smashes and bangs of battle.
“He’s in the Shrieking Shack. The snake’s with him,
it’s got some sort of magical protection around it. He’s
just sent Lucius Malfoy to find Snape.”
“Voldemort’s sitting in the Shrieking Shack?” said
Hermione, outraged. “He’s not — he’s not even
fighting?”
“He doesn’t think he needs to fight,” said Harry. “He
thinks I’m going to go to him.”
“But why?”
“He knows I’m after Horcruxes — he’s keeping Nagini
close beside him — obviously I’m going to have to go
to him to get near the thing — ”
“Right,” said Ron, squaring his shoulders. “So you
can’t go, that’s what he wants, what he’s expecting.
You stay here and look after Hermione, and I’ll go and
get it — ”
Harry cut across Ron.
“You two stay here, I’ll go under the Cloak and I’ll be
back as soon as I — ”
 
“No,” said Hermione, “it makes much more sense if I
take the Cloak and — ”
“Don’t even think about it,” Ron snarled at her.
Before Hermione could get farther than “Ron, I’m just
as capable — ” the tapestry at the top of the staircase
on which they stood was ripped open.
“POTTER!”
Two masked Death Eaters stood there, but even
before their wands were fully raised, Hermione
shouted, “Glisseo\”
The stairs beneath their feet flattened into a chute
and she, Harry, and Ron hurtled down it, unable to
control their speed but so fast that the Death Eaters’
Stunning Spells flew far over their heads. They shot
through the concealing tapestry at the bottom and
spun onto the floor, hitting the opposite wall.
“Duro\” cried Hermione, pointing her wand at the
tapestry, and there were two loud, sickening crunches
as the tapestry turned to stone and the Death Eaters
pursuing them crumpled against it.
“Get back!” shouted Ron, and he, Harry, and
Hermione flattened themselves against a door as a
herd of galloping desks thundered past, shepherded
by a sprinting Professor McGonagall. She appeared
not to notice them: Her hair had come down and
there was a gash on her cheek. As she turned the
corner, they heard her scream, “CHARGE!”
“Harry, you get the Cloak on,” said Hermione. “Never
mind us — ”
 
But he threw it over all three of them; large though
they were, he doubted anyone would see their
disembodied feet through the dust that clogged the
air, the falling stone, the shimmer of spells.
They ran down the next staircase and found
themselves in a corridor full of duelers. The portraits
on either side of the fighters were crammed with
figures screaming advice and encouragement, while
Death Eaters, both masked and unmasked, dueled
students and teachers. Dean had won himself a
wand, for he was face-to-face with Dolohov, Parvati
with Travers. Harry, Ron, and Hermione raised their
wands at once, ready to strike, but the duelers were
weaving and darting around so much that there was a
strong likelihood of hurting one of their own side if
they cast curses. Even as they stood braced, looking
for the opportunity to act, there came a great
“Wheeeeeeeeeeee\” and, looking up, Harry saw Peeves
zooming over them, dropping Snargaluff pods down
onto the Death Eaters, whose heads were suddenly
engulfed in wriggling green tubers like fat worms.
“Argh!”
A fistful of tubers had hit the Cloak over Ron’s head;
the slimy green roots were suspended improbably in
midair as Ron tried to shake them loose.
“Someone’s invisible there!” shouted a masked Death
Eater, pointing.
Dean made the most of the Death Eater’s momentary
distraction, knocking him out with a Stunning Spell;
Dolohov attempted to retaliate and Parvati shot a
Body-Bind Curse at him.
“LET’S GO!” Harry yelled, and he, Ron, and Hermione
gathered the Cloak tightly around themselves and
 
pelted, heads down, through the midst of the fighters,
slipping a little in pools of Snargaluff juice, toward the
top of the marble staircase into the entrance hall.
“I’m Draco Malfoy, I’m Draco, I’m on your side!”
Draco was on the upper landing, pleading with
another masked Death Eater. Harry Stunned the
Death Eater as they passed: Malfoy looked around,
beaming, for his savior, and Ron punched him from
under the Cloak. Malfoy fell backward on top of the
Death Eater, his mouth bleeding, utterly bemused.
“And that’s the second time we’ve saved your life
tonight, you two-faced bastard!” Ron yelled.
There were more duelers all over the stairs and in the
hall, Death Eaters everywhere Harry looked: Yaxley,
close to the front doors, in combat with Flitwick, a
masked Death Eater dueling Kingsley right beside
them. Students ran in every direction, some carrying
or dragging injured friends. Harry directed a Stunning
Spell toward the masked Death Eater; it missed but
nearly hit Neville, who had emerged from nowhere
brandishing armfuls of Venomous Tentacula, which
looped itself happily around the nearest Death Eater
and began reeling him in.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione sped down the marble
staircase: Glass shattered to their left, and the
Slytherin hourglass that had recorded House points
spilled its emeralds everywhere, so that people slipped
and staggered as they ran. Two bodies fell from the
balcony overhead as they reached the ground, and a
gray blur that Harry took for an animal sped four-
legged across the hall to sink its teeth into one of the
fallen.
 
“NO!” shrieked Hermione, and with a deafening blast
from her wand, Fenrir Greyback was thrown
backward from the feebly stirring body of Lavender
Brown. He hit the marble banisters and struggled to
return to his feet. Then, with a bright white flash and
a crack, a crystal ball fell on top of his head, and he
crumpled to the ground and did not move.
“I have more!” shrieked Professor Trelawney from over
the banisters. “More for any who want them! Here — ”
And with a movement like a tennis serve, she heaved
another enormous crystal sphere from her bag, waved
her wand through the air, and caused the ball to
speed across the hall and smash through a window.
At the same moment, the heavy wooden front doors
burst open, and more of the gigantic spiders forced
their way into the entrance hall.
Screams of terror rent the air: The fighters scattered,
Death Eaters and Hogwartians alike, and red and
green jets of light flew into the midst of the oncoming
monsters, which shuddered and reared, more
terrifying than ever.
“How do we get out?” yelled Ron over all the
screaming, but before either Harry or Hermione could
answer they were bowled aside: Hagrid had come
thundering down the stairs, brandishing his flowery
pink umbrella.
“Don’t hurt ’em, don’t hurt ’em!” he yelled.
“HAGRID, NO!”
Harry forgot everything else: He sprinted out from
under the Cloak, running bent double to avoid the
curses illuminating the whole hall.
 
“HAGRID, COME BACK!”
But he was not even halfway to Hagrid when he saw it
happen: Hagrid vanished amongst the spiders, and
with a great scurrying, a foul swarming movement,
they retreated under the onslaught of spells, Hagrid
buried in their midst.
“HAGRID!”
Harry heard someone calling his own name, whether
friend or foe he did not care: He was sprinting down
the front steps into the dark grounds, and the spiders
were swarming away with their prey, and he could see
nothing of Hagrid at all.
“HAGRID!”
He thought he could make out an enormous arm
waving from the midst of the spider swarm, but as he
made to chase after them, his way was impeded by a
monumental foot, which swung down out of the
darkness and made the ground on which he stood
shudder. He looked up: A giant stood before him,
twenty feet high, its head hidden in shadow, nothing
but its treelike, hairy shins illuminated by light from
the castle doors. With one brutal, fluid movement, it
smashed a massive fist through an upper window,
and glass rained down upon Harry, forcing him back
under the shelter of the doorway.
“Oh my — !” shrieked Hermione, as she and Ron
caught up with Harry and gazed upward at the giant
now trying to seize people through the window above.
“DONT!” Ron yelled, grabbing Hermione’s hand as
she raised her wand. “Stun him and hell crush half
the castle — ”
 
“HAGGER?”
Grawp came lurching around the corner of the castle;
only now did Harry realize that Grawp was, indeed,
an undersized giant. The gargantuan monster trying
to crush people on the upper floors looked around
and let out a roar. The stone steps trembled as he
stomped toward his smaller kin, and Grawp ’s
lopsided mouth fell open, showing yellow, half-brick-
sized teeth; and then they launched themselves at
each other with the savagery of lions.
“RUN!” Harry roared; the night was full of hideous
yells and blows as the giants wrestled, and he seized
Hermione’s hand and tore down the steps into the
grounds, Ron bringing up the rear. Harry had not lost
hope of finding and saving Hagrid; he ran so fast that
they were halfway toward the forest before they were
brought up short again.
The air around them had frozen: Harry’s breath
caught and solidified in his chest. Shapes moved out
in the darkness, swirling figures of concentrated
blackness, moving in a great wave toward the castle,
their faces hooded and their breath rattling. . . .
Ron and Hermione closed in beside him as the
sounds of fighting behind them grew suddenly muted,
deadened, because a silence only dementors could
bring was falling thickly through the night, and Fred
was gone, and Hagrid was surely dying or already
dead. ...
“Come on, Harry!” said Hermione’s voice from a very
long way away. “Patronuses, Harry, come on!”
He raised his wand, but a dull hopelessness was
spreading through him: How many more lay dead
 
that he did not yet know about; he felt as though his
soul had already half left his body. . . .
“HARRY, COME ON!” screamed Hermione.
A hundred dementors were advancing, gliding toward
them, sucking their way closer to Harry’s despair,
which was like a promise of a feast. ...
He saw Ron’s silver terrier burst into the air, flicker
feebly, and expire; he saw Hermione’s otter twist in
midair and fade; and his own wand trembled in his
hand, and he almost welcomed the oncoming
oblivion, the promise of nothing, of no feeling. . . .
And then a silver hare, a boar, and a fox soared past
Harry, Ron, and Hermione’s heads: The dementors
fell back before the creatures’ approach. Three more
people had arrived out of the darkness to stand
beside them, their wands outstretched, continuing to
cast their Patronuses: Luna, Ernie, and Seamus.
“That’s right,” said Luna encouragingly, as if they
were back in the Room of Requirement and this was
simply spell practice for the D.A. “That’s right, Harry
... come on, think of something happy. ...”
“Something happy?” he said, his voice cracked.
“We’re all still here,” she whispered, “we’re still
fighting. Come on, now. ...”
There was a silver spark, then a wavering light, and
then, with the greatest effort it had ever cost him, the
stag burst from the end of Harry’s wand. It cantered
forward, and now the dementors scattered in earnest,
and immediately the night was mild again, but the
sounds of the surrounding battle were loud in his
ears.
 
“Can’t thank you enough,” said Ron shakily, turning
to Luna, Ernie, and Seamus, “you just saved — ”
With a roar and an earth-quaking tremor, another
giant came lurching out of the darkness from the
direction of the forest, brandishing a club taller than
any of them.
“RUN!” Harry shouted again, but the others needed
no telling: They all scattered, and not a second too
soon, for next moment the creature’s vast foot had
fallen exactly where they had been standing. Harry
looked round: Ron and Hermione were following him,
but the other three had vanished back into the battle.
“Let’s get out of range!” yelled Ron as the giant swung
its club again and its bellows echoed through the
night, across the grounds where bursts of red and
green light continued to illuminate the darkness.
“The Whomping Willow,” said Harry, “go!”
Somehow he walled it all up in his mind, crammed it
into a small space into which he could not look now:
Thoughts of Fred and Hagrid, and his terror for all the
people he loved, scattered in and outside the castle,
must all wait, because they had to run, had to reach
the snake and Voldemort, because that was, as
Hermione said, the only way to end it —
He sprinted, half believing he could outdistance death
itself, ignoring the jets of light flying in the darkness
all around him, and the sound of the lake crashing
like the sea, and the creaking of the Forbidden Forest
though the night was windless; through grounds that
seemed themselves to have risen in rebellion, he ran
faster than he had ever moved in his life, and it was
he who saw the great tree first, the Willow that
 
protected the secret at its roots with whiplike,
slashing branches.
Panting and gasping, Harry slowed down, skirting the
Willow’s swiping branches, peering through the
darkness toward its thick trunk, trying to see the
single knot in the bark of the old tree that would
paralyze it. Ron and Hermione caught up, Hermione
so out of breath she could not speak.
“How — how’re we going to get in?” panted Ron. “I can
— see the place — if we just had — Crookshanks
again — ”
“Crookshanks?” wheezed Hermione, bent double,
clutching her chest. “Are you a wizard, or what?”
“Oh — right — yeah — ”
Ron looked around, then directed his wand at a twig
on the ground and said, “Wingardium Leviosal” The
twig flew up from the ground, spun through the air as
if caught by a gust of wind, then zoomed directly at
the trunk through the Willow’s ominously swaying
branches. It jabbed at a place near the roots, and at
once, the writhing tree became still.
“Perfect!” panted Hermione.
“Wait.”
For one teetering second, while the crashes and
booms of the battle filled the air, Harry hesitated.
Voldemort wanted him to do this, wanted him to
come. ... Was he leading Ron and Hermione into a
trap?
But then the reality seemed to close upon him, cruel
and plain: The only way forward was to kill the snake,
 
and the snake was where Voldemort was, and
Voldemort was at the end of this tunnel. ...
“Harry, we’re coming, just get in there!” said Ron,
pushing him forward.
Harry wriggled into the earthy passage hidden in the
tree’s roots. It was a much tighter squeeze than it had
been the last time they had entered it. The tunnel was
low-ceilinged: They had had to double up to move
through it nearly four years previously; now there was
nothing for it but to crawl. Harry went first, his wand
illuminated, expecting at any moment to meet
barriers, but none came. They moved in silence,
Harry’s gaze fixed upon the swinging beam of the
wand held in his fist.
At last the tunnel began to slope upward and Harry
saw a sliver of light ahead. Hermione tugged at his
ankle.
“The Cloak!” she whispered. “Put the Cloak on!”
He groped behind him and she forced the bundle of
slippery cloth into his free hand. With difficulty he
dragged it over himself, murmured, “Nox,”
extinguishing his wandlight, and continued on his
hands and knees, as silently as possible, all his
senses straining, expecting every second to be
discovered, to hear a cold clear voice, see a flash of
green light.
And then he heard voices coming from the room
directly ahead of them, only slightly muffled by the
fact that the opening at the end of the tunnel had
been blocked up by what looked like an old crate.
Hardly daring to breathe, Harry edged right up to the
opening and peered through a tiny gap left between
crate and wall.
 
The room beyond was dimly lit, but he could see
Nagini, swirling and coiling like a serpent underwater,
safe in her enchanted, starry sphere, which floated
unsupported in midair. He could see the edge of a
table, and a long-fingered white hand toying with a
wand. Then Snape spoke, and Harry’s heart lurched:
Snape was inches away from where he crouched,
hidden.
"... my Lord, their resistance is crumbling — ”
“ — and it is doing so without your help,” said
Voldemort in his high, clear voice. “Skilled wizard
though you are, Severus, I do not think you will make
much difference now. We are almost there ... almost.”
“Let me find the boy. Let me bring you Potter. I know I
can find him, my Lord. Please.”
Snape strode past the gap, and Harry drew back a
little, keeping his eyes fixed upon Nagini, wondering
whether there was any spell that might penetrate the
protection surrounding her, but he could not think of
anything. One failed attempt, and he would give away
his position. ...
Voldemort stood up. Harry could see him now, see the
red eyes, the flattened, serpentine face, the pallor of
him gleaming slightly in the semidarkness.
“I have a problem, Severus,” said Voldemort softly.
“My Lord?” said Snape.
Voldemort raised the Elder Wand, holding it as
delicately and precisely as a conductor’s baton.
“Why doesn’t it work for me, Severus?”
 
In the silence Harry imagined he could hear the snake
hissing slightly as it coiled and uncoiled — or was it
Voldemort’s sibilant sigh lingering on the air?
“My — my Lord?” said Snape blankly. “I do not
understand. You — you have performed extraordinary
magic with that wand.”
“No,” said Voldemort. “I have performed my usual
magic. I am extraordinary, but this wand ... no. It has
not revealed the wonders it has promised. I feel no
difference between this wand and the one I procured
from Ollivander all those years ago.”
Voldemort’s tone was musing, calm, but Harry’s scar
had begun to throb and pulse: Pain was building in
his forehead, and he could feel that controlled sense
of fury building inside Voldemort.
“No difference,” said Voldemort again.
Snape did not speak. Harry could not see his face: He
wondered whether Snape sensed danger, was trying
to find the right words to reassure his master.
Voldemort started to move around the room: Harry
lost sight of him for seconds as he prowled, speaking
in that same measured voice, while the pain and fury
mounted in Harry.
“I have thought long and hard, Severus. ... Do you
know why I have called you back from the battle?”
And for a moment Harry saw Snape ’s profile: His eyes
were fixed upon the coiling snake in its enchanted
cage.
“No, my Lord, but I beg you will let me return. Let me
find Potter.”
 
“You sound like Lucius. Neither of you understands
Potter as I do. He does not need finding. Potter will
come to me. I know his weakness, you see, his one
great flaw. He will hate watching the others struck
down around him, knowing that it is for him that it
happens. He will want to stop it at any cost. He will
come.”
“But my Lord, he might be killed accidentally by one
other than yourself — ”
“My instructions to my Death Eaters have been
perfectly clear. Capture Potter. Kill his friends — the
more, the better — but do not kill him.
“But it is of you that I wished to speak, Severus, not
Harry Potter. You have been very valuable to me. Very
valuable.”
“My Lord knows I seek only to serve him. But — let
me go and find the boy, my Lord. Let me bring him to
you. I know I can — ”
“I have told you, no!” said Voldemort, and Harry
caught the glint of red in his eyes as he turned again,
and the swishing of his cloak was like the slithering of
a snake, and he felt Voldemort’s impatience in his
burning scar. “My concern at the moment, Severus, is
what will happen when I finally meet the boy!”
“My Lord, there can be no question, surely — ?”
“ — but there is a question, Severus. There is.”
Voldemort halted, and Harry could see him plainly
again as he slid the Elder Wand through his white
fingers, staring at Snape.
 
“Why did both the wands I have used fail when
directed at Harry Potter?”
“I — I cannot answer that, my Lord.”
“Can’t you?”
The stab of rage felt like a spike driven through
Harry’s head: He forced his own fist into his mouth to
stop himself from crying out in pain. He closed his
eyes, and suddenly he was Voldemort, looking into
Snape’s pale face.
“My wand of yew did everything of which I asked it,
Severus, except to kill Harry Potter. Twice it failed.
Ollivander told me under torture of the twin cores,
told me to take another’s wand. I did so, but Lucius’s
wand shattered upon meeting Potter’s.”
“I — I have no explanation, my Lord.”
Snape was not looking at Voldemort now. His dark
eyes were still fixed upon the coiling serpent in its
protective sphere.
“I sought a third wand, Severus. The Elder Wand, the
Wand of Destiny, the Deathstick. I took it from its
previous master. I took it from the grave of Albus
Dumbledore.”
And now Snape looked at Voldemort, and Snape’s
face was like a death mask. It was marble white and
so still that when he spoke, it was a shock to see that
anyone lived behind the blank eyes.
“My Lord — let me go to the boy — ”
“All this long night, when I am on the brink of victory,
I have sat here,” said Voldemort, his voice barely
 
louder than a whisper, “wondering, wondering, why
the Elder Wand refuses to be what it ought to be,
refuses to perform as legend says it must perform for
its rightful owner ... and I think I have the answer.”
Snape did not speak.
“Perhaps you already know it? You are a clever man,
after all, Severus. You have been a good and faithful
servant, and I regret what must happen.”
“My Lord — ”
“The Elder Wand cannot serve me properly, Severus,
because I am not its true master. The Elder Wand
belongs to the wizard who killed its last owner. You
killed Albus Dumbledore. While you live, Severus, the
Elder Wand cannot be truly mine.”
“My Lord!” Snape protested, raising his wand.
“It cannot be any other way,” said Voldemort. “I must
master the wand, Severus. Master the wand, and I
master Potter at last.”
And Voldemort swiped the air with the Elder Wand. It
did nothing to Snape, who for a split second seemed
to think he had been reprieved: But then Voldemort’s
intention became clear. The snake’s cage was rolling
through the air, and before Snape could do anything
more than yell, it had encased him, head and
shoulders, and Voldemort spoke in Parseltongue.
“Kill.”
There was a terrible scream. Harry saw Snape ’s face
losing the little color it had left; it whitened as his
black eyes widened, as the snake’s fangs pierced his
 
neck, as he failed to push the enchanted cage off
himself, as his knees gave way and he fell to the floor.
“I regret it,” said Voldemort coldly.
He turned away; there was no sadness in him, no
remorse. It was time to leave this shack and take
charge, with a wand that would now do his full
bidding. He pointed it at the starry cage holding the
snake, which drifted upward, off Snape, who fell
sideways onto the floor, blood gushing from the
wounds in his neck. Voldemort swept from the room
without a backward glance, and the great serpent
floated after him in its huge protective sphere.
Back in the tunnel and his own mind, Harry opened
his eyes: He had drawn blood biting down on his
knuckles in the effort not to shout out. Now he was
looking through the tiny crack between crate and
wall, watching a foot in a black boot trembling on the
floor.
“Harry!” breathed Hermione behind him, but he had
already pointed his wand at the crate blocking his
view. It lifted an inch into the air and drifted sideways
silently. As quietly as he could, he pulled himself up
into the room.
He did not know why he was doing it, why he was
approaching the dying man: He did not know what he
felt as he saw Snape’s white face, and the fingers
trying to staunch the bloody wound at his neck.
Harry took off the Invisibility Cloak and looked down
upon the man he hated, whose widening black eyes
found Harry as he tried to speak. Harry bent over
him, and Snape seized the front of his robes and
pulled him close.
 
A terrible rasping, gurgling noise issued from Snape’s
throat.
“Take ... it. ... Take ... it. ...”
Something more than blood was leaking from Snape.
Silvery blue, neither gas nor liquid, it gushed from his
mouth and his ears and his eyes, and Harry knew
what it was, but did not know what to do —
A flask, conjured from thin air, was thrust into his
shaking hands by Hermione. Harry lifted the silvery
substance into it with his wand. When the flask was
full to the brim, and Snape looked as though there
was no blood left in him, his grip on Harry’s robes
slackened.
“Look ... at ... me. ...” he whispered.
The green eyes found the black, but after a second,
something in the depths of the dark pair seemed to
vanish, leaving them fixed, blank, and empty. The
hand holding Harry thudded to the floor, and Snape
moved no more.
 
THE PRINCE’S TALE
Harry remained kneeling at Snape’s side, simply
staring down at him, until quite suddenly a high, cold
voice spoke so close to them that Harry jumped to his
feet, the flask gripped tightly in his hands, thinking
that Voldemort had reentered the room.
Voldemort ’s voice reverberated from the walls and
floor, and Harry realized that he was talking to
Hogwarts and to all the surrounding area, that the
residents of Hogsmeade and all those still fighting in
the castle would hear him as clearly as if he stood
beside them, his breath on the back of their necks, a
deathblow away.
“You have fought,” said the high, cold voice,
“valiantly. Lord Voldemort knows how to value
bravery.
“Yet you have sustained heavy losses. If you continue
to resist me, you will all die, one by one. I do not wish
this to happen. Every drop of magical blood spilled is
a loss and a waste.
 
“Lord Voldemort is merciful. I command my forces to
retreat immediately.
“You have one hour. Dispose of your dead with
dignity. Treat your injured.
“I speak now, Harry Potter, directly to you. You have
permitted your friends to die for you rather than face
me yourself. I shall wait for one hour in the Forbidden
Forest. If, at the end of that hour, you have not come
to me, have not given yourself up, then battle
recommences. This time, I shall enter the fray myself,
Harry Potter, and I shall find you, and I shall punish
every last man, woman, and child who has tried to
conceal you from me. One hour.”
Both Ron and Hermione shook their heads frantically,
looking at Harry.
“Don’t listen to him,” said Ron.
“It’ll be all right,” said Hermione wildly. “Let’s — let’s
get back to the castle, if he’s gone to the forest we’ll
need to think of a new plan — ”
She glanced at Snape’s body, then hurried back to
the tunnel entrance. Ron followed her. Harry gathered
up the Invisibility Cloak, then looked down at Snape.
He did not know what to feel, except shock at the way
Snape had been killed, and the reason for which it
had been done. ...
They crawled back through the tunnel, none of them
talking, and Harry wondered whether Ron and
Hermione could still hear Voldemort ringing in their
heads, as he could.
 
You have permitted your friends to die for you rather
than face me yourself I shall wait for one hour in the
Forbidden Forest. . . . One hour. . . .
Small bundles seemed to litter the lawn at the front of
the castle. It could only be an hour or so from dawn,
yet it was pitch-black. The three of them hurried
toward the stone steps. A lone clog, the size of a small
boat, lay abandoned in front of them. There was no
other sign of Grawp or of his attacker.
The castle was unnaturally silent. There were no
flashes of light now, no bangs or screams or shouts.
The flagstones of the deserted entrance hall were
stained with blood. Emeralds were still scattered all
over the floor, along with pieces of marble and
splintered wood. Part of the banisters had been blown
away.
“Where is everyone?” whispered Hermione.
Ron led the way to the Great Hall. Harry stopped in
the doorway.
The House tables were gone and the room was
crowded. The survivors stood in groups, their arms
around each other’s necks. The injured were being
treated upon the raised platform by Madam Pomfrey
and a group of helpers. Firenze was amongst the
injured; his flank poured blood and he shook where
he lay, unable to stand.
The dead lay in a row in the middle of the Hall. Harry
could not see Fred’s body, because his family
surrounded him. George was kneeling at his head;
Mrs. Weasley was lying across Fred’s chest, her body
shaking, Mr. Weasley stroking her hair while tears
cascaded down his cheeks.
 
Without a word to Harry, Ron and Hermione walked
away. Harry saw Hermione approach Ginny, whose
face was swollen and blotchy, and hug her. Ron
joined Bill, Fleur, and Percy, who flung an arm
around Ron’s shoulders. As Ginny and Hermione
moved closer to the rest of the family, Harry had a
clear view of the bodies lying next to Fred: Remus and
Tonks, pale and still and peaceful-looking, apparently
asleep beneath the dark, enchanted ceiling.
The Great Hall seemed to fly away, become smaller,
shrink, as Harry reeled backward from the doorway.
He could not draw breath. He could not bear to look
at any of the other bodies, to see who else had died
for him. He could not bear to join the Weasleys, could
not look into their eyes, when if he had given himself
up in the first place, Fred might never have died. ...
He turned away and ran up the marble staircase.
Lupin, Tonks ... He yearned not to feel. ... He wished
he could rip out his heart, his innards, everything
that was screaming inside him. ...
The castle was completely empty; even the ghosts
seemed to have joined the mass mourning in the
Great Hall. Harry ran without stopping, clutching the
crystal flask of Snape’s last thoughts, and he did not
slow down until he reached the stone gargoyle
guarding the headmaster’s office.
“Password?”
“Dumbledore!” said Harry without thinking, because
it was he whom he yearned to see, and to his surprise
the gargoyle slid aside, revealing the spiral staircase
behind.
But when Harry burst into the circular office he found
a change. The portraits that hung all around the
 
walls were empty. Not a single headmaster or
headmistress remained to see him; all, it seemed, had
flitted away, charging through the paintings that lined
the castle, so that they could have a clear view of
what was going on.
Harry glanced hopelessly at Dumbledore’s deserted
frame, which hung directly behind the headmaster’s
chair, then turned his back on it. The stone Pensieve
lay in the cabinet where it had always been: Harry
heaved it onto the desk and poured Snape’s memories
into the wide basin with its runic markings around
the edge. To escape into someone else’s head would
be a blessed relief. ... Nothing that even Snape had
left him could be worse than his own thoughts. The
memories swirled, silver white and strange, and
without hesitating, with a feeling of reckless
abandonment, as though this would assuage his
torturing grief, Harry dived.
He fell headlong into sunlight, and his feet found
warm ground. When he straightened up, he saw that
he was in a nearly deserted playground. A single huge
chimney dominated the distant skyline. Two girls
were swinging backward and forward, and a skinny
boy was watching them from behind a clump of
bushes. His black hair was overlong and his clothes
were so mismatched that it looked deliberate: too
short jeans, a shabby, overlarge coat that might have
belonged to a grown man, an odd smocklike shirt.
Harry moved closer to the boy. Snape looked no more
than nine or ten years old, sallow, small, stringy.
There was undisguised greed in his thin face as he
watched the younger of the two girls swinging higher
and higher than her sister.
“Lily, don’t do it!” shrieked the elder of the two.
 
But the girl had let go of the swing at the very height
of its arc and flown into the air, quite literally flown,
launched herself skyward with a great shout of
laughter, and instead of crumpling on the playground
asphalt, she soared like a trapeze artist through the
air, staying up far too long, landing far too lightly.
“Mummy told you not to!”
Petunia stopped her swing by dragging the heels of
her sandals on the ground, making a crunching,
grinding sound, then leapt up, hands on hips.
“Mummy said you weren’t allowed, Lily!”
“But I’m fine,” said Lily, still giggling. “Tuney, look at
this. Watch what I can do.”
Petunia glanced around. The playground was
deserted apart from themselves and, though the girls
did not know it, Snape. Lily had picked up a fallen
flower from the bush behind which Snape lurked.
Petunia advanced, evidently torn between curiosity
and disapproval. Lily waited until Petunia was near
enough to have a clear view, then held out her palm.
The flower sat there, opening and closing its petals,
like some bizarre, many-lipped oyster.
“Stop it!” shrieked Petunia.
“It’s not hurting you,” said Lily, but she closed her
hand on the blossom and threw it back to the ground.
“It’s not right,” said Petunia, but her eyes had
followed the flower’s flight to the ground and lingered
upon it. “How do you do it?” she added, and there
was definite longing in her voice.
 
“It’s obvious, isn’t it?” Snape could no longer contain
himself, but had jumped out from behind the bushes.
Petunia shrieked and ran backward toward the
swings, but Lily, though clearly startled, remained
where she was. Snape seemed to regret his
appearance. A dull flush of color mounted the sallow
cheeks as he looked at Lily.
“What’s obvious?” asked Lily.
Snape had an air of nervous excitement. With a
glance at the distant Petunia, now hovering beside the
swings, he lowered his voice and said, “I know what
you are.”
“What do you mean?”
“You’re ... you’re a witch,” whispered Snape.
She looked affronted.
“ That’s not a very nice thing to say to somebody!”
She turned, nose in the air, and marched off toward
her sister.
“No!” said Snape. He was highly colored now, and
Harry wondered why he did not take off the
ridiculously large coat, unless it was because he did
not want to reveal the smock beneath it. He flapped
after the girls, looking ludicrously batlike, like his
older self.
The sisters considered him, united in disapproval,
both holding on to one of the swing poles as though it
was the safe place in tag.
 
“You are,” said Snape to Lily. “You are a witch. I’ve
been watching you for a while. But there’s nothing
wrong with that. My mum’s one, and I’m a wizard.”
Petunia’s laugh was like cold water.
“Wizard!” she shrieked, her courage returned now
that she had recovered from the shock of his
unexpected appearance. “I know who you are. You’re
that Snape boy! They live down Spinner’s End by the
river,” she told Lily, and it was evident from her tone
that she considered the address a poor
recommendation. “Why have you been spying on us?”
“Haven’t been spying,” said Snape, hot and
uncomfortable and dirty-haired in the bright sunlight.
“Wouldn’t spy on you, anyway,” he added spitefully,
“ you’re a Muggle.”
Though Petunia evidently did not understand the
word, she could hardly mistake the tone.
“Lily, come on, we’re leaving!” she said shrilly. Lily
obeyed her sister at once, glaring at Snape as she left.
He stood watching them as they marched through the
playground gate, and Harry, the only one left to
observe him, recognized Snape ’s bitter
disappointment, and understood that Snape had been
planning this moment for a while, and that it had all
gone wrong. . . .
The scene dissolved, and before Harry knew it, re-
formed around him. He was now in a small thicket of
trees. He could see a sunlit river glittering through
their trunks. The shadows cast by the trees made a
basin of cool green shade. Two children sat facing
each other, cross-legged on the ground. Snape had
removed his coat now; his odd smock looked less
peculiar in the half light.
 
"... and the Ministry can punish you if you do magic
outside school, you get letters.”
“But I have done magic outside school!”
“We’re all right. We haven’t got wands yet. They let
you off when you’re a kid and you can’t help it. But
once you’re eleven,” he nodded importantly, “and they
start training you, then you’ve got to go careful.”
There was a little silence. Lily had picked up a fallen
twig and twirled it in the air, and Harry knew that she
was imagining sparks trailing from it. Then she
dropped the twig, leaned in toward the boy, and said,
“It is real, isn’t it? It’s not a joke? Petunia says you’re
lying to me. Petunia says there isn’t a Hogwarts. It is
real, isn’t it?”
“It’s real for us,” said Snape. “Not for her. But we’ll get
the letter, you and me.”
“Really?” whispered Lily.
“Definitely,” said Snape, and even with his poorly cut
hair and his odd clothes, he struck an oddly
impressive figure sprawled in front of her, brimful of
confidence in his destiny.
“And will it really come by owl?” Lily whispered.
“Normally,” said Snape. “But you’re Muggle-born, so
someone from the school will have to come and
explain to your parents.”
“Does it make a difference, being Muggle-born?”
Snape hesitated. His black eyes, eager in the greenish
gloom, moved over the pale face, the dark red hair.
 
“No,” he said. “It doesn’t make any difference.”
“Good,” said Lily, relaxing: It was clear that she had
been worrying.
“You’ve got loads of magic,” said Snape. “I saw that.
All the time I was watching you ...”
His voice trailed away; she was not listening, but had
stretched out on the leafy ground and was looking up
at the canopy of leaves overhead. He watched her as
greedily as he had watched her in the playground.
“How are things at your house?” Lily asked.
A little crease appeared between his eyes.
“Fine,” he said.
“They’re not arguing anymore?”
“Oh yes, they’re arguing,” said Snape. He picked up a
fistful of leaves and began tearing them apart,
apparently unaware of what he was doing. “But it
won’t be that long and I’ll be gone.”
“Doesn’t your dad like magic?”
“He doesn’t like anything, much,” said Snape.
“Severus?”
A little smile twisted Snape ’s mouth when she said
his name.
“Yeah?”
“Tell me about the dementors again.”
 
“What d’you want to know about them for?”
“If I use magic outside school — ”
“They wouldn’t give you to the dementors for that!
Dementors are for people who do really bad stuff.
They guard the wizard prison, Azkaban. You’re not
going to end up in Azkaban, you’re too — ”
He turned red again and shredded more leaves. Then
a small rustling noise behind Harry made him turn:
Petunia, hiding behind a tree, had lost her footing.
“Tuney!” said Lily, surprise and welcome in her voice,
but Snape had jumped to his feet.
“Who’s spying now?” he shouted. “What d’you want?”
Petunia was breathless, alarmed at being caught.
Harry could see her struggling for something hurtful
to say.
“What is that you’re wearing, anyway?” she said,
pointing at Snape’s chest. “Your mum’s blouse?”
There was a crack: A branch over Petunia’s head had
fallen. Lily screamed: The branch caught Petunia on
the shoulder, and she staggered backward and burst
into tears.
“Tuney!”
But Petunia was running away. Lily rounded on
Snape.
“Did you make that happen?”
“No.” He looked both defiant and scared.
 
“You did!” She was backing away from him. “You did).
You hurt her!”
“No — no I didn’t!”
But the lie did not convince Lily: After one last
burning look, she ran from the little thicket, off after
her sister, and Snape looked miserable and confused.
And the scene re-formed. Harry looked around: He
was on platform nine and three-quarters, and Snape
stood beside him, slightly hunched, next to a thin,
sallow-faced, sour-looking woman who greatly
resembled him. Snape was staring at a family of four
a short distance away. The two girls stood a little
apart from their parents. Lily seemed to be pleading
with her sister; Harry moved closer to listen.
"... I’m sorry, Tuney, I’m sorry! Listen — ” She caught
her sister’s hand and held tight to it, even though
Petunia tried to pull it away. “Maybe once I’m there —
no, listen, Tuney! Maybe once I’m there, I’ll be able to
go to Professor Dumbledore and persuade him to
change his mind!”
“I don’t — want — to — go!” said Petunia, and she
dragged her hand back out of her sister’s grasp. “You
think I want to go to some stupid castle and learn to
be a — a — ”
Her pale eyes roved over the platform, over the cats
mewling in their owners’ arms, over the owls
fluttering and hooting at each other in cages, over the
students, some already in their long black robes,
loading trunks onto the scarlet steam engine or else
greeting one another with glad cries after a summer
apart.
 
“ — you think I want to be a — a freak?”
Lily’s eyes filled with tears as Petunia succeeded in
tugging her hand away.
“I’m not a freak,” said Lily. “That’s a horrible thing to
say.”
“That’s where you’re going,” said Petunia with relish.
“A special school for freaks. You and that Snape boy
... weirdos, that’s what you two are. It’s good you’re
being separated from normal people. It’s for our
safety.”
Lily glanced toward her parents, who were looking
around the platform with an air of wholehearted
enjoyment, drinking in the scene. Then she looked
back at her sister, and her voice was low and fierce.
“You didn’t think it was such a freak’s school when
you wrote to the headmaster and begged him to take
you.”
Petunia turned scarlet.
“Beg? I didn’t beg!”
“I saw his reply. It was very kind.”
“You shouldn’t have read — ” whispered Petunia, “that
was my private — how could you — ?”
Lily gave herself away by half-glancing toward where
Snape stood nearby. Petunia gasped.
“That boy found it! You and that boy have been
sneaking in my room!”
 
“No — not sneaking — ” Now Lily was on the
defensive. “Severus saw the envelope, and he couldn’t
believe a Muggle could have contacted Hogwarts,
that’s all! He says there must be wizards working
undercover in the postal service who take care of — ”
“Apparently wizards poke their noses in everywhere!”
said Petunia, now as pale as she had been flushed.
“ Freak).” she spat at her sister, and she flounced off to
where her parents stood. ...
The scene dissolved again. Snape was hurrying along
the corridor of the Hogwarts Express as it clattered
through the countryside. He had already changed into
his school robes, had perhaps taken the first
opportunity to take off his dreadful Muggle clothes. At
last he stopped, outside a compartment in which a
group of rowdy boys were talking. Hunched in a
corner seat beside the window was Lily, her face
pressed against the windowpane.
Snape slid open the compartment door and sat down
opposite Lily. She glanced at him and then looked
back out of the window. She had been crying.
“I don’t want to talk to you,” she said in a constricted
voice.
“Why not?”
“Tuney h-hates me. Because we saw that letter from
Dumbledore.”
“So what?”
She threw him a look of deep dislike.
“So she’s my sister!”
 
“She’s only a — ” He caught himself quickly; Lily, too
busy trying to wipe her eyes without being noticed,
did not hear him.
“But we’re going!” he said, unable to suppress the
exhilaration in his voice. “This is it! We’re off to
Hogwarts!”
She nodded, mopping her eyes, but in spite of herself,
she half smiled.
“You’d better be in Slytherin,” said Snape, encouraged
that she had brightened a little.
“Slytherin?”
One of the boys sharing the compartment, who had
shown no interest at all in Lily or Snape until that
point, looked around at the word, and Harry, whose
attention had been focused entirely on the two beside
the window, saw his father: slight, black-haired like
Snape, but with that indefinable air of having been
well-cared-for, even adored, that Snape so
conspicuously lacked.
“Who wants to be in Slytherin? I think I’d leave,
wouldn’t you?” James asked the boy lounging on the
seats opposite him, and with a jolt, Harry realized
that it was Sirius. Sirius did not smile.
“My whole family have been in Slytherin,” he said.
“Blimey,” said James, “and I thought you seemed all
right!”
Sirius grinned.
“Maybe I’ll break the tradition. Where are you
heading, if you’ve got the choice?”
 
James lifted an invisible sword.
“ ‘Gryffindor, where dwell the brave at heart!’ Like my
dad.”
Snape made a small, disparaging noise. James turned
on him.
“Got a problem with that?”
“No,” said Snape, though his slight sneer said
otherwise. “If you’d rather be brawny than brainy — ”
“Where ’re you hoping to go, seeing as you’re neither?”
interjected Sirius.
James roared with laughter. Lily sat up, rather
flushed, and looked from James to Sirius in dislike.
“Come on, Severus, let’s find another compartment.”
“Oooooo ...”
James and Sirius imitated her lofty voice; James tried
to trip Snape as he passed.
“See ya, Snivellus!” a voice called, as the
compartment door slammed. ...
And the scene dissolved once more. ...
Harry was standing right behind Snape as they faced
the candlelit House tables, lined with rapt faces. Then
Professor McGonagall said, “Evans, Lily!”
He watched his mother walk forward on trembling
legs and sit down upon the rickety stool. Professor
McGonagall dropped the Sorting Hat onto her head,
 
and barely a second after it had touched the dark red
hair, the hat cried, “ Gryffindoii”
Harry heard Snape let out a tiny groan. Lily took off
the hat, handed it back to Professor McGonagall, then
hurried toward the cheering Gryffindors, but as she
went she glanced back at Snape, and there was a sad
little smile on her face. Harry saw Sirius move up the
bench to make room for her. She took one look at
him, seemed to recognize him from the train, folded
her arms, and firmly turned her back on him.
The roll call continued. Harry watched Lupin,
Pettigrew, and his father join Lily and Sirius at the
Gryffindor table. At last, when only a dozen students
remained to be sorted, Professor McGonagall called
Snape.
Harry walked with him to the stool, watched him
place the hat upon his head. “Slytherinl” cried the
Sorting Hat.
And Severus Snape moved off to the other side of the
Hall, away from Lily, to where the Slytherins were
cheering him, to where Lucius Malfoy, a prefect badge
gleaming upon his chest, patted Snape on the back as
he sat down beside him. ...
And the scene changed. ...
Lily and Snape were walking across the castle
courtyard, evidently arguing. Harry hurried to catch
up with them, to listen in. As he reached them, he
realized how much taller they both were: A few years
seemed to have passed since their Sorting.
"... thought we were supposed to be friends?” Snape
was saying. “Best friends?”
 
“We are, Sev, but I don’t like some of the people you’re
hanging round with! I’m sorry, but I detest Avery and
Mulciber! Mulciber\ What do you see in him, Sev, he’s
creepy! D’you know what he tried to do to Mary
Macdonald the other day?”
Lily had reached a pillar and leaned against it,
looking up into the thin, sallow face.
“That was nothing,” said Snape. “It was a laugh,
that’s all — ”
“It was Dark Magic, and if you think that’s funny — ”
“What about the stuff Potter and his mates get up
to?” demanded Snape. His color rose again as he said
it, unable, it seemed, to hold in his resentment.
“What’s Potter got to do with anything?” said Lily.
“They sneak out at night. There’s something weird
about that Lupin. Where does he keep going?”
“He’s ill,” said Lily. “They say he’s ill — ”
“Every month at the full moon?” said Snape.
“I know your theory,” said Lily, and she sounded cold.
“Why are you so obsessed with them anyway? Why do
you care what they’re doing at night?”
“I’m just trying to show you they’re not as wonderful
as everyone seems to think they are.”
The intensity of his gaze made her blush.
“They don’t use Dark Magic, though.” She dropped
her voice. “And you’re being really ungrateful. I heard
what happened the other night. You went sneaking
 
down that tunnel by the Whomping Willow, and
James Potter saved you from whatever’s down there
Snape’s whole face contorted and he spluttered,
“Saved? Saved? You think he was playing the hero?
He was saving his neck and his friends’ too! You’re
not going to — I won’t let you — ”
“Let me? Let me?”
Lily’s bright green eyes were slits. Snape backtracked
at once.
“I didn’t mean — I just don’t want to see you made a
fool of — He fancies you, James Potter fancies you!”
The words seemed wrenched from him against his
will. “And he’s not ... everyone thinks ... big Quidditch
hero — ” Snape’s bitterness and dislike were rendering
him incoherent, and Lily’s eyebrows were traveling
farther and farther up her forehead.
“I know James Potter’s an arrogant toerag,” she said,
cutting across Snape. “I don’t need you to tell me
that. But Mulciber’s and Avery’s idea of humor is just
evil. Evil, Sev. I don’t understand how you can be
friends with them.”
Harry doubted that Snape had even heard her
strictures on Mulciber and Avery. The moment she
had insulted James Potter, his whole body had
relaxed, and as they walked away there was a new
spring in Snape’s step. ...
And the scene dissolved. ...
Harry watched again as Snape left the Great Hall after
sitting his O.W.L. in Defense Against the Dark Arts,
watched as he wandered away from the castle and
 
strayed inadvertently close to the place beneath the
beech tree where James, Sirius, Lupin, and Pettigrew
sat together. But Harry kept his distance this time,
because he knew what happened after James had
hoisted Severus into the air and taunted him; he
knew what had been done and said, and it gave him
no pleasure to hear it again. ... He watched as Lily
joined the group and went to Snape’s defense.
Distantly he heard Snape shout at her in his
humiliation and his fury, the unforgivable word:
“MudbloocL.”
The scene changed. ...
“I’m sorry.”
“I’m not interested.”
“I’m sorry!”
“Save your breath.”
It was nighttime. Lily, who was wearing a dressing
gown, stood with her arms folded in front of the
portrait of the Fat Lady, at the entrance to Gryffindor
Tower.
“I only came out because Mary told me you were
threatening to sleep here.”
“I was. I would have done. I never meant to call you
Mudblood, it just — ”
“Slipped out?” There was no pity in Lily’s voice. “It’s
too late. I’ve made excuses for you for years. None of
my friends can understand why I even talk to you.
You and your precious little Death Eater friends —
you see, you don’t even deny it! You don’t even deny
 
that’s what you’re all aiming to be! You can’t wait to
join You- Know- Who, can you?”
He opened his mouth, but closed it without speaking.
“I can’t pretend anymore. You’ve chosen your way,
I’ve chosen mine.”
“No — listen, I didn’t mean — ”
“ — to call me Mudblood? But you call everyone of my
birth Mudblood, Severus. Why should I be any
different?”
He struggled on the verge of speech, but with a
contemptuous look she turned and climbed back
through the portrait hole. ...
The corridor dissolved, and the scene took a little
longer to reform: Harry seemed to fly through shifting
shapes and colors until his surroundings solidified
again and he stood on a hilltop, forlorn and cold in
the darkness, the wind whistling through the
branches of a few leafless trees. The adult Snape was
panting, turning on the spot, his wand gripped tightly
in his hand, waiting for something or for someone. ...
His fear infected Harry too, even though he knew that
he could not be harmed, and he looked over his
shoulder, wondering what it was that Snape was
waiting for —
Then a blinding, jagged jet of white light flew through
the air: Harry thought of lightning, but Snape had
dropped to his knees and his wand had flown out of
his hand.
“Don’t kill me!”
“That was not my intention.”
 
Any sound of Dumbledore Apparating had been
drowned by the sound of the wind in the branches.
He stood before Snape with his robes whipping
around him, and his face was illuminated from below
in the light cast by his wand.
“Well, Severus? What message does Lord Voldemort
have for me?”
“No — no message — I’m here on my own account!”
Snape was wringing his hands: He looked a little
mad, with his straggling black hair flying around him.
“I — I come with a warning — no, a request — please
Dumbledore flicked his wand. Though leaves and
branches still flew through the night air around them,
silence fell on the spot where he and Snape faced
each other.
“What request could a Death Eater make of me?”
“The — the prophecy . . . the prediction . . . Trelawney
“Ah, yes,” said Dumbledore. “How much did you relay
to Lord Voldemort?”
“Everything — everything I heard!” said Snape. “That
is why — it is for that reason — he thinks it means
Lily Evans!”
“The prophecy did not refer to a woman,” said
Dumbledore. “It spoke of a boy born at the end of
July — ”
 
“You know what I mean! He thinks it means her son,
he is going to hunt her down — kill them all — ”
“If she means so much to you,” said Dumbledore,
“surely Lord Voldemort will spare her? Could you not
ask for mercy for the mother, in exchange for the
son?”
“I have — I have asked him — ”
“You disgust me,” said Dumbledore, and Harry had
never heard so much contempt in his voice. Snape
seemed to shrink a little. “You do not care, then,
about the deaths of her husband and child? They can
die, as long as you have what you want?”
Snape said nothing, but merely looked up at
Dumbledore.
“Hide them all, then,” he croaked. “Keep her — them
— safe. Please.”
“And what will you give me in return, Severus?”
“In — in return?” Snape gaped at Dumbledore, and
Harry expected him to protest, but after a long
moment he said, “Anything.”
The hilltop faded, and Harry stood in Dumbledore’s
office, and something was making a terrible sound,
like a wounded animal. Snape was slumped forward
in a chair and Dumbledore was standing over him,
looking grim. After a moment or two, Snape raised his
face, and he looked like a man who had lived a
hundred years of misery since leaving the wild hilltop.
“I thought ... you were going ... to keep her ... safe.
 
“She and James put their faith in the wrong person,”
said Dumbledore. “Rather like you, Severus. Weren’t
you hoping that Lord Voldemort would spare her?”
Snape’s breathing was shallow.
“Her boy survives,” said Dumbledore.
With a tiny jerk of the head, Snape seemed to flick off
an irksome fly.
“Her son lives. He has her eyes, precisely her eyes.
You remember the shape and color of Lily Evans’s
eyes, I am sure?”
“DON’T!” bellowed Snape. “Gone ... dead ...”
“Is this remorse, Severus?”
“I wish ... I wish / were dead. ...”
“And what use would that be to anyone?” said
Dumbledore coldly. “If you loved Lily Evans, if you
truly loved her, then your way forward is clear.”
Snape seemed to peer through a haze of pain, and
Dumbledore ’s words appeared to take a long time to
reach him.
“What — what do you mean?”
“You know how and why she died. Make sure it was
not in vain. Help me protect Lily’s son.”
“He does not need protection. The Dark Lord has gone
“The Dark Lord will return, and Harry Potter will be in
terrible danger when he does.”
 
There was a long pause, and slowly Snape regained
control of himself, mastered his own breathing. At
last he said, “Very well. Very well. But never — never
tell, Dumbledore! This must be between us! Swear it! I
cannot bear . . . especially Potter’s son ... I want your
word!”
“My word, Severus, that I shall never reveal the best
of you?” Dumbledore sighed, looking down into
Snape’s ferocious, anguished face. “If you insist ...”
The office dissolved but re-formed instantly. Snape
was pacing up and down in front of Dumbledore.
“ — mediocre, arrogant as his father, a determined
rule-breaker, delighted to find himself famous,
attention-seeking and impertinent — ”
“You see what you expect to see, Severus,” said
Dumbledore, without raising his eyes from a copy of
Transfiguration Today. “Other teachers report that the
boy is modest, likable, and reasonably talented.
Personally, I find him an engaging child.”
Dumbledore turned a page, and said, without looking
up, “Keep an eye on Quirrell, won’t you?”
A whirl of color, and now everything darkened, and
Snape and Dumbledore stood a little apart in the
entrance hall, while the last stragglers from the Yule
Ball passed them on their way to bed.
“Well?” murmured Dumbledore.
“Karkaroff’s Mark is becoming darker too. He is
panicking, he fears retribution; you know how much
help he gave the Ministry after the Dark Lord fell.”
Snape looked sideways at Dumbledore ’s crooked-
P a g e | 769 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling
nosed profile. “Karkaroff intends to flee if the Mark
burns.”
“Does he?” said Dumbledore softly, as Fleur Delacour
and Roger Davies came giggling in from the grounds.
“And are you tempted to join him?”
“No,” said Snape, his black eyes on Fleur’s and
Roger’s retreating figures. “I am not such a coward.”
“No,” agreed Dumbledore. “You are a braver man by
far than Igor Karkaroff. You know, I sometimes think
we Sort too soon. ...”
He walked away, leaving Snape looking stricken. ...
And now Harry stood in the headmaster’s office yet
again. It was nighttime, and Dumbledore sagged
sideways in the thronelike chair behind the desk,
apparently semiconscious. His right hand dangled
over the side, blackened and burned. Snape was
muttering incantations, pointing his wand at the
wrist of the hand, while with his left hand he tipped a
goblet full of thick golden potion down Dumbledore ’s
throat. After a moment or two, Dumbledore ’s eyelids
fluttered and opened.
“Why,” said Snape, without preamble, “ why did you
put on that ring? It carries a curse, surely you
realized that. Why even touch it?”
Marvolo Gaunt’s ring lay on the desk before
Dumbledore. It was cracked; the sword of Gryffindor
lay beside it.
Dumbledore grimaced.
“I ... was a fool. Sorely tempted ...”
 
“Tempted by what?”
Dumbledore did not answer.
“It is a miracle you managed to return here!” Snape
sounded furious. “That ring carried a curse of
extraordinary power, to contain it is all we can hope
for; I have trapped the curse in one hand for the time
being — ”
Dumbledore raised his blackened, useless hand, and
examined it with the expression of one being shown
an interesting curio.
“You have done very well, Severus. How long do you
think I have?”
Dumbledore ’s tone was conversational; he might have
been asking for a weather forecast. Snape hesitated,
and then said, “I cannot tell. Maybe a year. There is
no halting such a spell forever. It will spread
eventually, it is the sort of curse that strengthens over
time.”
Dumbledore smiled. The news that he had less than a
year to live seemed a matter of little or no concern to
him.
“I am fortunate, extremely fortunate, that I have you,
Severus.”
“If you had only summoned me a little earlier, I might
have been able to do more, buy you more time!” said
Snape furiously. He looked down at the broken ring
and the sword. “Did you think that breaking the ring
would break the curse?”
“Something like that ... I was delirious, no doubt. ...”
said Dumbledore. With an effort he straightened
 
himself in his chair. “Well, really, this makes matters
much more straightforward.”
Snape looked utterly perplexed. Dumbledore smiled.
“I refer to the plan Lord Voldemort is revolving around
me. His plan to have the poor Malfoy boy murder me.”
Snape sat down in the chair Harry had so often
occupied, across the desk from Dumbledore. Harry
could tell that he wanted to say more on the subject
of Dumbledore ’s cursed hand, but the other held it up
in polite refusal to discuss the matter further.
Scowling, Snape said, “The Dark Lord does not expect
Draco to succeed. This is merely punishment for
Lucius’s recent failures. Slow torture for Draco’s
parents, while they watch him fail and pay the price.”
“In short, the boy has had a death sentence
pronounced upon him as surely as I have,” said
Dumbledore. “Now, I should have thought the natural
successor to the job, once Draco fails, is yourself?”
There was a short pause.
“That, I think, is the Dark Lord’s plan.”
“Lord Voldemort foresees a moment in the near future
when he will not need a spy at Hogwarts?”
“He believes the school will soon be in his grasp, yes.”
“And if it does fall into his grasp,” said Dumbledore,
almost, it seemed, as an aside, “I have your word that
you will do all in your power to protect the students of
Hogwarts?”
Snape gave a stiff nod.
 
“Good. Now then. Your first priority will be to discover
what Draco is up to. A frightened teenage boy is a
danger to others as well as to himself. Offer him help
and guidance, he ought to accept, he likes you — ”
“ — much less since his father has lost favor. Draco
blames me, he thinks I have usurped Lucius’s
position.”
“All the same, try. I am concerned less for myself than
for accidental victims of whatever schemes might
occur to the boy. Ultimately, of course, there is only
one thing to be done if we are to save him from Lord
Voldemort’s wrath.”
Snape raised his eyebrows and his tone was sardonic
as he asked, “Are you intending to let him kill you?”
“Certainly not. You must kill me.”
There was a long silence, broken only by an odd
clicking noise. Fawkes the phoenix was gnawing a bit
of cuttlebone.
“Would you like me to do it now?” asked Snape, his
voice heavy with irony. “Or would you like a few
moments to compose an epitaph?”
“Oh, not quite yet,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “I
daresay the moment will present itself in due course.
Given what has happened tonight,” he indicated his
withered hand, “we can be sure that it will happen
within a year.”
“If you don’t mind dying,” said Snape roughly, “why
not let Draco do it?”
 
“That boy’s soul is not yet so damaged,” said
Dumbledore. “I would not have it ripped apart on my
account.”
“And my soul, Dumbledore? Mine?”
“You alone know whether it will harm your soul to
help an old man avoid pain and humiliation,” said
Dumbledore. “I ask this one great favor of you,
Severus, because death is coming for me as surely as
the Chudley Cannons will finish bottom of this year’s
league. I confess I should prefer a quick, painless exit
to the protracted and messy affair it will be if, for
instance, Greyback is involved — I hear Voldemort
has recruited him? Or dear Bellatrix, who likes to
play with her food before she eats it.”
His tone was light, but his blue eyes pierced Snape as
they had frequently pierced Harry, as though the soul
they discussed was visible to him. At last Snape gave
another curt nod.
Dumbledore seemed satisfied.
“Thank you, Severus ...”
The office disappeared, and now Snape and
Dumbledore were strolling together in the deserted
castle grounds by twilight.
“What are you doing with Potter, all these evenings
you are closeted together?” Snape asked abruptly.
Dumbledore looked weary.
“Why? You aren’t trying to give him more detentions,
Severus? The boy will soon have spent more time in
detention than out.”
 
“He is his father over again — ”
“In looks, perhaps, but his deepest nature is much
more like his mother’s. I spend time with Harry
because I have things to discuss with him,
information I must give him before it is too late.”
“Information,” repeated Snape. “You trust him ... you
do not trust me.”
“It is not a question of trust. I have, as we both know,
limited time. It is essential that I give the boy enough
information for him to do what he needs to do.”
“And why may I not have the same information?”
“I prefer not to put all of my secrets in one basket,
particularly not a basket that spends so much time
dangling on the arm of Lord Voldemort.”
“Which I do on your orders!”
“And you do it extremely well. Do not think that I
underestimate the constant danger in which you
place yourself, Severus. To give Voldemort what
appears to be valuable information while withholding
the essentials is a job I would entrust to nobody but
you.”
“Yet you confide much more in a boy who is incapable
of Occlumency, whose magic is mediocre, and who
has a direct connection into the Dark Lord’s mind!”
“Voldemort fears that connection,” said Dumbledore.
“Not so long ago he had one small taste of what truly
sharing Harry’s mind means to him. It was pain such
as he has never experienced. He will not try to
possess Harry again, I am sure of it. Not in that way.”
 
“I don’t understand.”
“Lord Voldemort’s soul, maimed as it is, cannot bear
close contact with a soul like Harry’s. Like a tongue
on frozen steel, like flesh in flame — ”
“Souls? We were talking of minds!”
“In the case of Harry and Lord Voldemort, to speak of
one is to speak of the other.”
Dumbledore glanced around to make sure that they
were alone. They were close by the Forbidden Forest
now, but there was no sign of anyone near them.
“After you have killed me, Severus — ”
“You refuse to tell me everything, yet you expect that
small service of me!” snarled Snape, and real anger
flared in the thin face now. “You take a great deal for
granted, Dumbledore! Perhaps I have changed my
mind!”
“You gave me your word, Severus. And while we are
talking about services you owe me, I thought you
agreed to keep a close eye on our young Slytherin
friend?”
Snape looked angry, mutinous. Dumbledore sighed.
“Come to my office tonight, Severus, at eleven, and
you shall not complain that I have no confidence in
you. ...”
They were back in Dumbledore ’s office, the windows
dark, and Fawkes sat silent as Snape sat quite still,
as Dumbledore walked around him, talking.
 
“Harry must not know, not until the last moment, not
until it is necessary, otherwise how could he have the
strength to do what must be done?”
“But what must he do?”
“That is between Harry and me. Now listen closely,
Severus. There will come a time — after my death —
do not argue, do not interrupt! There will come a time
when Lord Voldemort will seem to fear for the life of
his snake.”
“For Nagini?” Snape looked astonished.
“Precisely. If there comes a time when Lord Voldemort
stops sending that snake forth to do his bidding, but
keeps it safe beside him under magical protection,
then, I think, it will be safe to tell Harry.”
“Tell him what?”
Dumbledore took a deep breath and closed his eyes.
“Tell him that on the night Lord Voldemort tried to kill
him, when Lily cast her own life between them as a
shield, the Killing Curse rebounded upon Lord
Voldemort, and a fragment of Voldemort’s soul was
blasted apart from the whole, and latched itself onto
the only living soul left in that collapsing building.
Part of Lord Voldemort lives inside Harry, and it is
that which gives him the power of speech with
snakes, and a connection with Lord Voldemort’s mind
that he has never understood. And while that
fragment of soul, unmissed by Voldemort, remains
attached to and protected by Harry, Lord Voldemort
cannot die.”
 
Harry seemed to be watching the two men from one
end of a long tunnel, they were so far away from him,
their voices echoing strangely in his ears.
“So the boy . . . the boy must die?” asked Snape quite
calmly.
“And Voldemort himself must do it, Severus. That is
essential.”
Another long silence. Then Snape said, “I thought ...
all these years . . . that we were protecting him for her.
For Lily.”
“We have protected him because it has been essential
to teach him, to raise him, to let him try his strength,”
said Dumbledore, his eyes still tight shut.
“Meanwhile, the connection between them grows ever
stronger, a parasitic growth: Sometimes I have
thought he suspects it himself. If I know him, he will
have arranged matters so that when he does set out
to meet his death, it will truly mean the end of
Voldemort.”
Dumbledore opened his eyes. Snape looked horrified.
“You have kept him alive so that he can die at the
right moment?”
“Don’t be shocked, Severus. How many men and
women have you watched die?”
“Lately, only those whom I could not save,” said
Snape. He stood up. “You have used me.”
“Meaning?”
“I have spied for you and lied for you, put myself in
mortal danger for you. Everything was supposed to be
 
to keep Lily Potter’s son safe. Now you tell me you
have been raising him like a pig for slaughter — ”
“But this is touching, Severus,” said Dumbledore
seriously. “Have you grown to care for the boy, after
all?”
“For him?” shouted Snape. “Expecto Patronuml”
From the tip of his wand burst the silver doe: She
landed on the office floor, bounded once across the
office, and soared out of the window. Dumbledore
watched her fly away, and as her silvery glow faded
he turned back to Snape, and his eyes were full of
tears.
“After all this time?”
“Always,” said Snape.
And the scene shifted. Now, Harry saw Snape talking
to the portrait of Dumbledore behind his desk.
“You will have to give Voldemort the correct date of
Harry’s departure from his aunt and uncle’s,” said
Dumbledore. “Not to do so will raise suspicion, when
Voldemort believes you so well informed. However,
you must plant the idea of decoys; that, I think, ought
to ensure Harry’s safety. Try Confunding Mundungus
Fletcher. And Severus, if you are forced to take part
in the chase, be sure to act your part convincingly. ...
I am counting upon you to remain in Lord
Voldemort’s good books as long as possible, or
Hogwarts will be left to the mercy of the Carrows. ...”
Now Snape was head to head with Mundungus in an
unfamiliar tavern, Mundungus ’s face looking
curiously blank, Snape frowning in concentration.
 
“You will suggest to the Order of the Phoenix,” Snape
murmured, “that they use decoys. Polyjuice Potion.
Identical Potters. It is the only thing that might work.
You will forget that I have suggested this. You will
present it as your own idea. You understand?”
“I understand,” murmured Mundungus, his eyes
unfocused. ...
Now Harry was flying alongside Snape on a
broomstick through a clear dark night: He was
accompanied by other hooded Death Eaters, and
ahead were Lupin and a Harry who was really George.
... A Death Eater moved ahead of Snape and raised
his wand, pointing it directly at Lupin’s back —
“ Sectumsemprcd” shouted Snape.
But the spell, intended for the Death Eater’s wand
hand, missed and hit George instead —
And next, Snape was kneeling in Sirius’s old
bedroom. Tears were dripping from the end of his
hooked nose as he read the old letter from Lily. The
second page carried only a few words:
could ever have been friends with Gellert Grindelwald.
I think her mind’s going, personally!
Lots of love,
Lily
Snape took the page bearing Lily’s signature, and her
love, and tucked it inside his robes. Then he ripped in
two the photograph he was also holding, so that he
kept the part from which Lily laughed, throwing the
portion showing James and Harry back onto the floor,
under the chest of drawers. ...
 
And now Snape stood again in the headmaster’s
study as Phineas Nigellus came hurrying into his
portrait.
“Headmaster! They are camping in the Forest of Dean!
The Mudblood — ”
“Do not use that word!”
“ — the Granger girl, then, mentioned the place as she
opened her bag and I heard her!”
“Good. Very good!” cried the portrait of Dumbledore
behind the headmaster’s chair. “Now, Severus, the
sword! Do not forget that it must be taken under
conditions of need and valor — and he must not know
that you give it! If Voldemort should read Harry’s
mind and see you acting for him — ”
“I know,” said Snape curtly. He approached the
portrait of Dumbledore and pulled at its side. It
swung forward, revealing a hidden cavity behind it
from which he took the sword of Gryffindor.
“And you still aren’t going to tell me why it’s so
important to give Potter the sword?” said Snape as he
swung a traveling cloak over his robes.
“No, I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore’s portrait. “He
will know what to do with it. And Severus, be very
careful, they may not take kindly to your appearance
after George Weasley’s mishap — ”
Snape turned at the door.
“Don’t worry, Dumbledore,” he said coolly. “I have a
plan. ...”
 
And Snape left the room. Harry rose up out of the
Pensieve, and moments later he lay on the carpeted
floor in exactly the same room: Snape might just have
closed the door.
 
THE FOREST AGAIN
Finally, the truth. Lying with his face pressed into the
dusty carpet of the office where he had once thought
he was learning the secrets of victory, Harry
understood at last that he was not supposed to
survive. His job was to walk calmly into Death’s
welcoming arms. Along the way, he was to dispose of
Voldemort’s remaining links to life, so that when at
last he flung himself across Voldemort’s path, and did
not raise a wand to defend himself, the end would be
clean, and the job that ought to have been done in
Godric’s Hollow would be finished: Neither would live,
neither could survive.
He felt his heart pounding fiercely in his chest. How
strange that in his dread of death, it pumped all the
harder, valiantly keeping him alive. But it would have
to stop, and soon. Its beats were numbered. How
many would there be time for, as he rose and walked
through the castle for the last time, out into the
grounds and into the forest?
 
Terror washed over him as he lay on the floor, with
that funeral drum pounding inside him. Would it hurt
to die? All those times he had thought that it was
about to happen and escaped, he had never really
thought of the thing itself: His will to live had always
been so much stronger than his fear of death. Yet it
did not occur to him now to try to escape, to outrun
Voldemort. It was over, he knew it, and all that was
left was the thing itself: dying.
If he could only have died on that summer’s night
when he had left number four, Privet Drive, for the
last time, when the noble phoenix-feather wand had
saved him! If he could only have died like Hedwig, so
quickly he would not have known it had happened!
Or if he could have launched himself in front of a
wand to save someone he loved. ... He envied even his
parents’ deaths now. This cold-blooded walk to his
own destruction would require a different kind of
bravery. He felt his fingers trembling slightly and
made an effort to control them, although no one could
see him; the portraits on the walls were all empty.
Slowly, very slowly, he sat up, and as he did so he felt
more alive and more aware of his own living body
than ever before. Why had he never appreciated what
a miracle he was, brain and nerve and bounding
heart? It would all be gone ... or at least, he would be
gone from it. His breath came slow and deep, and his
mouth and throat were completely dry, but so were
his eyes.
Dumbledore’s betrayal was almost nothing. Of course
there had been a bigger plan; Harry had simply been
too foolish to see it, he realized that now. He had
never questioned his own assumption that
Dumbledore wanted him alive. Now he saw that his
life span had always been determined by how long it
took to eliminate all the Horcruxes. Dumbledore had
 
passed the job of destroying them to him, and
obediently he had continued to chip away at the
bonds tying not only Voldemort, but himself, to life!
How neat, how elegant, not to waste any more lives,
but to give the dangerous task to the boy who had
already been marked for slaughter, and whose death
would not be a calamity, but another blow against
Voldemort.
And Dumbledore had known that Harry would not
duck out, that he would keep going to the end, even
though it was his end, because he had taken trouble
to get to know him, hadn’t he? Dumbledore knew, as
Voldemort knew, that Harry would not let anyone else
die for him now that he had discovered it was in his
power to stop it. The images of Fred, Lupin, and
Tonks lying dead in the Great Hall forced their way
back into his mind’s eye, and for a moment he could
hardly breathe: Death was impatient. ...
But Dumbledore had overestimated him. He had
failed: The snake survived. One Horcrux remained to
bind Voldemort to the earth, even after Harry had
been killed. True, that would mean an easier job for
somebody. He wondered who would do it. ... Ron and
Hermione would know what needed to be done, of
course. ... That would have been why Dumbledore
wanted him to confide in two others ... so that if he
fulfilled his true destiny a little early, they could carry
on. ...
Like rain on a cold window, these thoughts pattered
against the hard surface of the incontrovertible truth,
which was that he must die. I must die. It must end.
Ron and Hermione seemed a long way away, in a far-
off country; he felt as though he had parted from
them long ago. There would be no good-byes and no
explanations, he was determined of that. This was a
 
journey they could not take together, and the
attempts they would make to stop him would waste
valuable time. He looked down at the battered gold
watch he had received on his seventeenth birthday.
Nearly half of the hour allotted by Voldemort for his
surrender had elapsed.
He stood up. His heart was leaping against his ribs
like a frantic bird. Perhaps it knew it had little time
left, perhaps it was determined to fulfill a lifetime’s
beats before the end. He did not look back as he
closed the office door.
The castle was empty. He felt ghostly striding through
it alone, as if he had already died. The portrait people
were still missing from their frames; the whole place
was eerily still, as if all its remaining lifeblood were
concentrated in the Great Hall where the dead and
the mourners were crammed.
Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak over himself and
descended through the floors, at last walking down
the marble staircase into the entrance hall. Perhaps
some tiny part of him hoped to be sensed, to be seen,
to be stopped, but the Cloak was, as ever,
impenetrable, perfect, and he reached the front doors
easily.
Then Neville nearly walked into him. He was one half
of a pair that was carrying a body in from the
grounds. Harry glanced down and felt another dull
blow to his stomach: Colin Creevey, though underage,
must have sneaked back just as Malfoy, Crabbe, and
Goyle had done. He was tiny in death.
“You know what? I can manage him alone, Neville,”
said Oliver Wood, and he heaved Colin over his
shoulder in a fireman’s lift and carried him into the
Great Hall.
 
Neville leaned against the door frame for a moment
and wiped his forehead with the back of his hand. He
looked like an old man. Then he set off down the
steps again into the darkness to recover more bodies.
Harry took one glance back at the entrance of the
Great Hall. People were moving around, trying to
comfort each other, drinking, kneeling beside the
dead, but he could not see any of the people he loved,
no hint of Hermione, Ron, Ginny, or any of the other
Weasleys, no Luna. He felt he would have given all the
time remaining to him for just one last look at them;
but then, would he ever have the strength to stop
looking? It was better like this.
He moved down the steps and out into the darkness.
It was nearly four in the morning, and the deathly
stillness of the grounds felt as though they were
holding their breath, waiting to see whether he could
do what he must.
Harry moved toward Neville, who was bending over
another body.
“Neville.”
“Blimey, Harry, you nearly gave me heart failure!”
Harry had pulled off the Cloak: The idea had come to
him out of nowhere, born out of a desire to make
absolutely sure.
“Where are you going, alone?” Neville asked
suspiciously.
“It’s all part of the plan,” said Harry. “There’s
something I’ve got to do. Listen — Neville — ”
 
“Harry!” Neville looked suddenly scared. “Harry,
you’re not thinking of handing yourself over?”
“No,” Harry lied easily. “ ’Course not ... this is
something else. But I might be out of sight for a while.
You know Voldemort’s snake, Neville? He’s got a huge
snake. ... Calls it Nagini ...”
“I’ve heard, yeah. ... What about it?”
“It’s got to be killed. Ron and Hermione know that,
but just in case they — ”
The awfulness of that possibility smothered him for a
moment, made it impossible to keep talking. But he
pulled himself together again: This was crucial, he
must be like Dumbledore, keep a cool head, make
sure there were backups, others to carry on.
Dumbledore had died knowing that three people still
knew about the Horcruxes; now Neville would take
Harry’s place: There would still be three in the secret.
“Just in case they’re — busy — and you get the
chance — ”
“Kill the snake?”
“Kill the snake,” Harry repeated.
“All right, Harry. You’re okay, are you?”
“I’m fine. Thanks, Neville.”
But Neville seized his wrist as Harry made to move
on.
“We’re all going to keep fighting, Harry. You know
that?”
 
“Yeah, I — ”
The suffocating feeling extinguished the end of the
sentence; he could not go on. Neville did not seem to
find it strange. He patted Harry on the shoulder,
released him, and walked away to look for more
bodies.
Harry swung the Cloak back over himself and walked
on. Someone else was moving not far away, stooping
over another prone figure on the ground. He was feet
away from her when he realized it was Ginny.
He stopped in his tracks. She was crouching over a
girl who was whispering for her mother.
“It’s all right,” Ginny was saying. “It’s okay. We’re
going to get you inside.”
“But I want to go home,” whispered the girl. “I don’t
want to fight anymore!”
“I know,” said Ginny, and her voice broke. “It’s going
to be all right.”
Ripples of cold undulated over Harry’s skin. He
wanted to shout out to the night, he wanted Ginny to
know that he was there, he wanted her to know where
he was going. He wanted to be stopped, to be dragged
back, to be sent back home. ...
But he was home. Hogwarts was the first and best
home he had known. He and Voldemort and Snape,
the abandoned boys, had all found home here. ...
Ginny was kneeling beside the injured girl now,
holding her hand. With a huge effort Harry forced
himself on. He thought he saw Ginny look around as
he passed, and wondered whether she had sensed
 
someone walking nearby, but he did not speak, and
he did not look back.
Hagrid’s hut loomed out of the darkness. There were
no lights, no sound of Fang scrabbling at the door,
his bark booming in welcome. All those visits to
Hagrid, and the gleam of the copper kettle on the fire,
and rock cakes and giant grubs, and his great
bearded face, and Ron vomiting slugs, and Hermione
helping him save Norbert ...
He moved on, and now he reached the edge of the
forest, and he stopped.
A swarm of dementors was gliding amongst the trees;
he could feel their chill, and he was not sure he would
be able to pass safely through it. He had no strength
left for a Patronus. He could no longer control his own
trembling. It was not, after all, so easy to die. Every
second he breathed, the smell of the grass, the cool
air on his face, was so precious: To think that people
had years and years, time to waste, so much time it
dragged, and he was clinging to each second. At the
same time he thought that he would not be able to go
on, and knew that he must. The long game was
ended, the Snitch had been caught, it was time to
leave the air. ...
The Snitch. His nerveless fingers fumbled for a
moment with the pouch at his neck and he pulled it
out.
I open at the close.
Breathing fast and hard, he stared down at it. Now
that he wanted time to move as slowly as possible, it
seemed to have sped up, and understanding was
coming so fast it seemed to have bypassed thought.
This was the close. This was the moment.
 
He pressed the golden metal to his lips and
whispered, “I am about to die.”
The metal shell broke open. He lowered his shaking
hand, raised Draco’s wand beneath the Cloak, and
murmured, “Lumos.”
The black stone with its jagged crack running down
the center sat in the two halves of the Snitch. The
Resurrection Stone had cracked down the vertical line
representing the Elder Wand. The triangle and circle
representing the Cloak and the stone were still
discernible.
And again Harry understood without having to think.
It did not matter about bringing them back, for he
was about to join them. He was not really fetching
them: They were fetching him.
He closed his eyes and turned the stone over in his
hand three times.
He knew it had happened, because he heard slight
movements around him that suggested frail bodies
shifting their footing on the earthy, twig- strewn
ground that marked the outer edge of the forest. He
opened his eyes and looked around.
They were neither ghost nor truly flesh, he could see
that. They resembled most closely the Riddle that had
escaped from the diary so long ago, and he had been
memory made nearly solid. Less substantial than
living bodies, but much more than ghosts, they
moved toward him, and on each face, there was the
same loving smile.
James was exactly the same height as Harry. He was
wearing the clothes in which he had died, and his
 
hair was untidy and ruffled, and his glasses were a
little lopsided, like Mr. Weasley’s.
Sirius was tall and handsome, and younger by far
than Harry had seen him in life. He loped with an
easy grace, his hands in his pockets and a grin on his
face.
Lupin was younger too, and much less shabby, and
his hair was thicker and darker. He looked happy to
be back in this familiar place, scene of so many
adolescent wanderings.
Lily’s smile was widest of all. She pushed her long
hair back as she drew close to him, and her green
eyes, so like his, searched his face hungrily, as
though she would never be able to look at him
enough.
“You’ve been so brave.”
He could not speak. His eyes feasted on her, and he
thought that he would like to stand and look at her
forever, and that would be enough.
“You are nearly there,” said James. “Very close. We
are ... so proud of you.”
“Does it hurt?”
The childish question had fallen from Harry’s lips
before he could stop it.
“Dying? Not at all,” said Sirius. “Quicker and easier
than falling asleep.”
“And he will want it to be quick. He wants it over,”
said Lupin.
 
“I didn’t want you to die,” Harry said. These words
came without his volition. “Any of you. I’m sorry — ”
He addressed Lupin more than any of them,
beseeching him.
“ — right after you’d had your son ... Remus, I’m sorry
“I am sorry too,” said Lupin. “Sorry I will never know
him . . . but he will know why I died and I hope he will
understand. I was trying to make a world in which he
could live a happier life.”
A chilly breeze that seemed to emanate from the heart
of the forest lifted the hair at Harry’s brow. He knew
that they would not tell him to go, that it would have
to be his decision.
“You’ll stay with me?”
“Until the very end,” said James.
“They won’t be able to see you?” asked Harry.
“We are part of you,” said Sirius. “Invisible to anyone
else.”
Harry looked at his mother.
“Stay close to me,” he said quietly.
And he set off. The dementors’ chill did not overcome
him; he passed through it with his companions, and
they acted like Patronuses to him, and together they
marched through the old trees that grew closely
together, their branches tangled, their roots gnarled
and twisted underfoot. Harry clutched the Cloak
tightly around him in the darkness, traveling deeper
 
and deeper into the forest, with no idea where exactly
Voldemort was, but sure that he would find him.
Beside him, making scarcely a sound, walked James,
Sirius, Lupin, and Lily, and their presence was his
courage, and the reason he was able to keep putting
one foot in front of the other.
His body and mind felt oddly disconnected now, his
limbs working without conscious instruction, as if he
were passenger, not driver, in the body he was about
to leave. The dead who walked beside him through
the forest were much more real to him now than the
living back at the castle: Ron, Hermione, Ginny, and
all the others were the ones who felt like ghosts as he
stumbled and slipped toward the end of his life,
toward Voldemort. ...
A thud and a whisper: Some other living creature had
stirred close by. Harry stopped under the Cloak,
peering around, listening, and his mother and father,
Lupin and Sirius stopped too.
“Someone there,” came a rough whisper close at
hand. “He’s got an Invisibility Cloak. Could it be — ?”
Two figures emerged from behind a nearby tree: Their
wands flared, and Harry saw Yaxley and Dolohov
peering into the darkness, directly at the place Harry,
his mother and father and Sirius and Lupin stood.
Apparently they could not see anything.
“Definitely heard something,” said Yaxley. “Animal,
d’you reckon?”
“That head case Hagrid kept a whole bunch of stuff in
here,” said Dolohov, glancing over his shoulder.
Yaxley looked down at his watch.
 
“Time’s nearly up. Potter’s had his hour. He’s not
coming.”
“And he was sure he’d come! He won’t be happy.”
“Better go back,” said Yaxley. “Find out what the plan
is now.”
He and Dolohov turned and walked deeper into the
forest. Harry followed them, knowing that they would
lead him exactly where he wanted to go. He glanced
sideways, and his mother smiled at him, and his
father nodded encouragement.
They had traveled on mere minutes when Harry saw
light ahead, and Yaxley and Dolohov stepped out into
a clearing that Harry knew had been the place where
the monstrous Aragog had once lived. The remnants
of his vast web were there still, but the swarm of
descendants he had spawned had been driven out by
the Death Eaters, to fight for their cause.
A fire burned in the middle of the clearing, and its
flickering light fell over a crowd of completely silent,
watchful Death Eaters. Some of them were still
masked and hooded; others showed their faces. Two
giants sat on the outskirts of the group, casting
massive shadows over the scene, their faces cruel,
rough-hewn like rock. Harry saw Fenrir, skulking,
chewing his long nails; the great blond Rowle was
dabbing at his bleeding lip. He saw Lucius Malfoy,
who looked defeated and terrified, and Narcissa,
whose eyes were sunken and full of apprehension.
Every eye was fixed upon Voldemort, who stood with
his head bowed, and his white hands folded over the
Elder Wand in front of him. He might have been
praying, or else counting silently in his mind, and
Harry, standing still on the edge of the scene, thought
 
absurdly of a child counting in a game of hide-and-
seek. Behind his head, still swirling and coiling, the
great snake Nagini floated in her glittering, charmed
cage, like a monstrous halo.
When Dolohov and Yaxley rejoined the circle,
Voldemort looked up.
“No sign of him, my Lord,” said Dolohov.
Voldemort ’s expression did not change. The red eyes
seemed to burn in the firelight. Slowly he drew the
Elder Wand between his long fingers.
“My Lord — ”
Bellatrix had spoken: She sat closest to Voldemort,
disheveled, her face a little bloody but otherwise
unharmed.
Voldemort raised his hand to silence her, and she did
not speak another word, but eyed him in worshipful
fascination.
“I thought he would come,” said Voldemort in his
high, clear voice, his eyes on the leaping flames. “I
expected him to come.”
Nobody spoke. They seemed as scared as Harry,
whose heart was now throwing itself against his ribs
as though determined to escape the body he was
about to cast aside. His hands were sweating as he
pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and stuffed it beneath
his robes, with his wand. He did not want to be
tempted to fight.
“I was, it seems ... mistaken,” said Voldemort.
“You weren’t.”
 
Harry said it as loudly as he could, with all the force
he could muster: He did not want to sound afraid.
The Resurrection Stone slipped from between his
numb fingers, and out of the corner of his eyes he
saw his parents, Sirius, and Lupin vanish as he
stepped forward into the firelight. At that moment he
felt that nobody mattered but Voldemort. It was just
the two of them.
The illusion was gone as soon as it had come. The
giants roared as the Death Eaters rose together, and
there were many cries, gasps, even laughter.
Voldemort had frozen where he stood, but his red
eyes had found Harry, and he stared as Harry moved
toward him, with nothing but the fire between them.
Then a voice yelled: “HARRY! NO!”
He turned: Hagrid was bound and trussed, tied to a
tree nearby. His massive body shook the branches
overhead as he struggled, desperate.
“NO! NO! HARRY, WHAT’RE YEH — ?”
“QUIET!” shouted Rowle, and with a flick of his wand
Hagrid was silenced.
Bellatrix, who had leapt to her feet, was looking
eagerly from Voldemort to Harry, her breast heaving.
The only things that moved were the flames and the
snake, coiling and uncoiling in the glittering cage
behind Voldemort’s head.
Harry could feel his wand against his chest, but he
made no attempt to draw it. He knew that the snake
was too well protected, knew that if he managed to
point the wand at Nagini, fifty curses would hit him
first. And still, Voldemort and Harry looked at each
other, and now Voldemort tilted his head a little to
 
the side, considering the boy standing before him,
and a singularly mirthless smile curled the lipless
mouth.
“Harry Potter,” he said very softly. His voice might
have been part of the spitting fire. “The Boy Who
Lived.”
None of the Death Eaters moved. They were waiting:
Everything was waiting. Hagrid was struggling, and
Bellatrix was panting, and Harry thought inexplicably
of Ginny, and her blazing look, and the feel of her lips
on his —
Voldemort had raised his wand. His head was still
tilted to one side, like a curious child, wondering what
would happen if he proceeded. Harry looked back into
the red eyes, and wanted it to happen now, quickly,
while he could still stand, before he lost control,
before he betrayed fear —
He saw the mouth move and a flash of green light,
and everything was gone.
 
KING’S CROSS
He lay facedown, listening to the silence. He was
perfectly alone. Nobody was watching. Nobody else
was there. He was not perfectly sure that he was
there himself.
A long time later, or maybe no time at all, it came to
him that he must exist, must be more than
disembodied thought, because he was lying, definitely
lying, on some surface. Therefore he had a sense of
touch, and the thing against which he lay existed too.
Almost as soon as he had reached this conclusion,
Harry became conscious that he was naked.
Convinced as he was of his total solitude, this did not
concern him, but it did intrigue him slightly. He
wondered whether, as he could feel, he would be able
to see. In opening them, he discovered that he had
eyes.
He lay in a bright mist, though it was not like mist he
had ever experienced before. His surroundings were
not hidden by cloudy vapor; rather the cloudy vapor
 
had not yet formed into surroundings. The floor on
which he lay seemed to be white, neither warm nor
cold, but simply there, a flat, blank something on
which to be.
He sat up. His body appeared unscathed. He touched
his face. He was not wearing glasses anymore.
Then a noise reached him through the unformed
nothingness that surrounded him: the small soft
thumpings of something that flapped, flailed, and
struggled. It was a pitiful noise, yet also slightly
indecent. He had the uncomfortable feeling that he
was eavesdropping on something furtive, shameful.
For the first time, he wished he were clothed.
Barely had the wish formed in his head than robes
appeared a short distance away. He took them and
pulled them on: They were soft, clean, and warm. It
was extraordinary how they had appeared, just like
that, the moment he had wanted them. ...
He stood up, looking around. Was he in some great
Room of Requirement? The longer he looked, the more
there was to see. A great domed glass roof glittered
high above him in sunlight. Perhaps it was a palace.
All was hushed and still, except for those odd
thumping and whimpering noises coming from
somewhere close by in the mist. ...
Harry turned slowly on the spot, and his
surroundings seemed to invent themselves before his
eyes. A wide-open space, bright and clean, a hall
larger by far than the Great Hall, with that clear,
domed glass ceiling. It was quite empty. He was the
only person there, except for —
 
He recoiled. He had spotted the thing that was
making the noises. It had the form of a small, naked
child, curled on the ground, its skin raw and rough,
flayed-looking, and it lay shuddering under a seat
where it had been left, unwanted, stuffed out of sight,
struggling for breath.
He was afraid of it. Small and fragile and wounded
though it was, he did not want to approach it.
Nevertheless he drew slowly nearer, ready to jump
back at any moment. Soon he stood near enough to
touch it, yet he could not bring himself to do it. He
felt like a coward. He ought to comfort it, but it
repulsed him.
“You cannot help.”
He spun around. Albus Dumbledore was walking
toward him, sprightly and upright, wearing sweeping
robes of midnight blue.
“Harry.” He spread his arms wide, and his hands were
both whole and white and undamaged. “You
wonderful boy. You brave, brave man. Let us walk.”
Stunned, Harry followed as Dumbledore strode away
from where the flayed child lay whimpering, leading
him to two seats that Harry had not previously
noticed, set some distance away under that high,
sparkling ceiling. Dumbledore sat down in one of
them, and Harry fell into the other, staring at his old
headmaster’s face. Dumbledore ’s long silver hair and
beard, the piercingly blue eyes behind half-moon
spectacles, the crooked nose: Everything was as he
had remembered it. And yet...
“But you’re dead,” said Harry.
“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore matter-of-factly.
 
“Then ... I’m dead too?”
“Ah,” said Dumbledore, smiling still more broadly.
“That is the question, isn’t it? On the whole, dear boy,
I think not.”
They looked at each other, the old man still beaming.
“Not?” repeated Harry.
“Not,” said Dumbledore.
“But ...” Harry raised his hand instinctively toward
the lightning scar. It did not seem to be there. “But I
should have died — I didn’t defend myself! I meant to
let him kill me!”
“And that,” said Dumbledore, “will, I think, have
made all the difference.”
Happiness seemed to radiate from Dumbledore like
light, like fire: Harry had never seen the man so
utterly, so palpably content.
“Explain,” said Harry.
“But you already know,” said Dumbledore. He
twiddled his thumbs together.
“I let him kill me,” said Harry. “Didn’t I?”
“You did,” said Dumbledore, nodding. “Go on!”
“So the part of his soul that was in me ...”
Dumbledore nodded still more enthusiastically,
urging Harry onward, a broad smile of encouragement
on his face.
 
"... has it gone?”
“Oh yes!” said Dumbledore. “Yes, he destroyed it.
Your soul is whole, and completely your own, Harry.”
“But then ...”
Harry glanced over his shoulder to where the small,
maimed creature trembled under the chair.
“What is that, Professor?”
“Something that is beyond either of our help,” said
Dumbledore.
“But if Voldemort used the Killing Curse,” Harry
started again, “and nobody died for me this time —
how can I be alive?”
“I think you know,” said Dumbledore. “Think back.
Remember what he did, in his ignorance, in his greed
and his cruelty.”
Harry thought. He let his gaze drift over his
surroundings. If it was indeed a palace in which they
sat, it was an odd one, with chairs set in little rows
and bits of railing here and there, and still, he and
Dumbledore and the stunted creature under the chair
were the only beings there. Then the answer rose to
his lips easily, without effort.
“He took my blood,” said Harry.
“Precisely!” said Dumbledore. “He took your blood and
rebuilt his living body with it! Your blood in his veins,
Harry, Lily’s protection inside both of you! He tethered
you to life while he lives!”
 
“I live . . . while he lives? But I thought ... I thought it
was the other way round! I thought we both had to
die? Or is it the same thing?”
He was distracted by the whimpering and thumping
of the agonized creature behind them and glanced
back at it yet again.
“Are you sure we can’t do anything?”
“There is no help possible.”
“Then explain ... more,” said Harry, and Dumbledore
smiled.
“You were the seventh Horcrux, Harry, the Horcrux
he never meant to make. He had rendered his soul so
unstable that it broke apart when he committed those
acts of unspeakable evil, the murder of your parents,
the attempted killing of a child. But what escaped
from that room was even less than he knew. He left
more than his body behind. He left part of himself
latched to you, the would-be victim who had survived.
“And his knowledge remained woefully incomplete,
Harry! That which Voldemort does not value, he takes
no trouble to comprehend. Of house-elves and
children’s tales, of love, loyalty, and innocence,
Voldemort knows and understands nothing. Nothing.
That they all have a power beyond his own, a power
beyond the reach of any magic, is a truth he has
never grasped.
“He took your blood believing it would strengthen
him. He took into his body a tiny part of the
enchantment your mother laid upon you when she
died for you. His body keeps her sacrifice alive, and
while that enchantment survives, so do you and so
does Voldemort’s one last hope for himself.”
 
Dumbledore smiled at Harry, and Harry stared at
him.
“And you knew this? You knew — all along?”
“I guessed. But my guesses have usually been good,”
said Dumbledore happily, and they sat in silence for
what seemed like a long time, while the creature
behind them continued to whimper and tremble.
“There’s more,” said Harry. “There’s more to it. Why
did my wand break the wand he borrowed?”
“As to that, I cannot be sure.”
“Have a guess, then,” said Harry, and Dumbledore
laughed.
“What you must understand, Harry, is that you and
Lord Voldemort have journeyed together into realms
of magic hitherto unknown and untested. But here is
what I think happened, and it is unprecedented, and
no wandmaker could, I think, ever have predicted it
or explained it to Voldemort.
“Without meaning to, as you now know, Lord
Voldemort doubled the bond between you when he
returned to a human form. A part of his soul was still
attached to yours, and, thinking to strengthen
himself, he took a part of your mother’s sacrifice into
himself. If he could only have understood the precise
and terrible power of that sacrifice, he would not,
perhaps, have dared to touch your blood. ... But then,
if he had been able to understand, he could not be
Lord Voldemort, and might never have murdered at
all.
“Having ensured this two-fold connection, having
wrapped your destinies together more securely than
 
ever two wizards were joined in history, Voldemort
proceeded to attack you with a wand that shared a
core with yours. And now something very strange
happened, as we know. The cores reacted in a way
that Lord Voldemort, who never knew that your wand
was twin of his, had never expected.
“He was more afraid than you were that night, Harry.
You had accepted, even embraced, the possibility of
death, something Lord Voldemort has never been able
to do. Your courage won, your wand overpowered his.
And in doing so, something happened between those
wands, something that echoed the relationship
between their masters.
“I believe that your wand imbibed some of the power
and qualities of Voldemort’s wand that night, which is
to say that it contained a little of Voldemort himself.
So your wand recognized him when he pursued you,
recognized a man who was both kin and mortal
enemy, and it regurgitated some of his own magic
against him, magic much more powerful than
anything Lucius’s wand had ever performed. Your
wand now contained the power of your enormous
courage and of Voldemort’s own deadly skill: What
chance did that poor stick of Lucius Malfoy’s stand?”
“But if my wand was so powerful, how come
Hermione was able to break it?” asked Harry.
“My dear boy, its remarkable effects were directed
only at Voldemort, who had tampered so ill-advisedly
with the deepest laws of magic. Only toward him was
that wand abnormally powerful. Otherwise it was a
wand like any other ... though a good one, I am sure,”
Dumbledore finished kindly.
 
Harry sat in thought for a long time, or perhaps
seconds. It was very hard to be sure of things like
time, here.
“He killed me with your wand.”
“He failed to kill you with my wand,” Dumbledore
corrected Harry. “I think we can agree that you are
not dead — though, of course,” he added, as if fearing
he had been discourteous, “I do not minimize your
sufferings, which I am sure were severe.”
“I feel great at the moment, though,” said Harry,
looking down at his clean, unblemished hands.
“Where are we, exactly?”
“Well, I was going to ask you that,” said Dumbledore,
looking around. “Where would you say that we are?”
Until Dumbledore had asked, Harry had not known.
Now, however, he found that he had an answer ready
to give.
“It looks,” he said slowly, “like King’s Cross station.
Except a lot cleaner and empty, and there are no
trains as far as I can see.”
“King’s Cross station!” Dumbledore was chuckling
immoderately. “Good gracious, really?”
“Well, where do you think we are?” asked Harry, a
little defensively.
“My dear boy, I have no idea. This is, as they say,
your party.”
Harry had no idea what this meant; Dumbledore was
being infuriating. He glared at him, then remembered
 
a much more pressing question than that of their
current location.
“The Deathly Hallows,” he said, and he was glad to
see that the words wiped the smile from
Dumbledore’s face.
“Ah, yes,” he said. He even looked a little worried.
“Well?”
For the first time since Harry had met Dumbledore,
he looked less than an old man, much less. He looked
fleetingly like a small boy caught in wrongdoing.
“Can you forgive me?” he said. “Can you forgive me
for not trusting you? For not telling you? Harry, I only
feared that you would fail as I had failed. I only
dreaded that you would make my mistakes. I crave
your pardon, Harry. I have known, for some time now,
that you are the better man.”
“What are you talking about?” asked Harry, startled
by Dumbledore’s tone, by the sudden tears in his
eyes.
“The Hallows, the Hallows,” murmured Dumbledore.
“A desperate man’s dream!”
“But they’re real!”
“Real, and dangerous, and a lure for fools,” said
Dumbledore. “And I was such a fool. But you know,
don’t you? I have no secrets from you anymore. You
know.”
“What do I know?”
 
Dumbledore turned his whole body to face Harry, and
tears still sparkled in the brilliantly blue eyes.
“Master of death, Harry, master of Death! Was I
better, ultimately, than Voldemort?”
“Of course you were,” said Harry. “Of course — how
can you ask that? You never killed if you could avoid
it!”
“True, true,” said Dumbledore, and he was like a
child seeking reassurance. “Yet I too sought a way to
conquer death, Harry.”
“Not the way he did,” said Harry. After all his anger at
Dumbledore, how odd it was to sit here, beneath the
high, vaulted ceiling, and defend Dumbledore from
himself. “Hallows, not Horcruxes.”
“Hallows,” murmured Dumbledore, “not Horcruxes.
Precisely.”
There was a pause. The creature behind them
whimpered, but Harry no longer looked around.
“Grindelwald was looking for them too?” he asked.
Dumbledore closed his eyes for a moment and
nodded.
“It was the thing, above all, that drew us together,” he
said quietly. “Two clever, arrogant boys with a shared
obsession. He wanted to come to Godric’s Hollow, as I
am sure you have guessed, because of the grave of
Ignotus Peverell. He wanted to explore the place the
third brother had died.”
“So it’s true?” asked Harry. “All of it? The Peverell
brothers — ”
 
“ — were the three brothers of the tale,” said
Dumbledore, nodding. “Oh yes, I think so. Whether
they met Death on a lonely road ... I think it more
likely that the Peverell brothers were simply gifted,
dangerous wizards who succeeded in creating those
powerful objects. The story of them being Death’s own
Hallows seems to me the sort of legend that might
have sprung up around such creations.
“The Cloak, as you know now, traveled down through
the ages, father to son, mother to daughter, right
down to Ignotus’s last living descendant, who was
born, as Ignotus was, in the village of Godric’s
Hollow.”
Dumbledore smiled at Harry.
“Me?”
“You. You have guessed, I know, why the Cloak was
in my possession on the night your parents died.
James had showed it to me just a few days
previously. It explained much of his undetected
wrong-doing at school! I could hardly believe what I
was seeing. I asked to borrow it, to examine it. I had
long since given up my dream of uniting the Hallows,
but I could not resist, could not help taking a closer
look. ... It was a Cloak the likes of which I had never
seen, immensely old, perfect in every respect . . . and
then your father died, and I had two Hallows at last,
all to myself!”
His tone was unbearably bitter.
“The Cloak wouldn’t have helped them survive,
though,” Harry said quickly. “Voldemort knew where
my mum and dad were. The Cloak couldn’t have
made them curse-proof.”
 
“True,” sighed Dumbledore. “True.”
Harry waited, but Dumbledore did not speak, so he
prompted him.
“So you’d given up looking for the Hallows when you
saw the Cloak?”
“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore faintly. It seemed that he
forced himself to meet Harry’s eyes. “You know what
happened. You know. You cannot despise me more
than I despise myself.”
“But I don’t despise you — ”
“Then you should,” said Dumbledore. He drew a deep
breath. “You know the secret of my sister’s ill health,
what those Muggles did, what she became. You know
how my poor father sought revenge, and paid the
price, died in Azkaban. You know how my mother
gave up her own life to care for Ariana.
“I resented it, Harry.”
Dumbledore stated it baldly, coldly. He was looking
now over the top of Harry’s head, into the distance.
“I was gifted, I was brilliant. I wanted to escape. I
wanted to shine. I wanted glory.
“Do not misunderstand me,” he said, and pain
crossed the face so that he looked ancient again. “I
loved them. I loved my parents, I loved my brother
and my sister, but I was selfish, Harry, more selfish
than you, who are a remarkably selfless person, could
possibly imagine.
“So that, when my mother died, and I was left the
responsibility of a damaged sister and a wayward
 
brother, I returned to my village in anger and
bitterness. Trapped and wasted, I thought! And then,
of course, he came. ...”
Dumbledore looked directly into Harry’s eyes again.
“Grindelwald. You cannot imagine how his ideas
caught me, Harry, inflamed me. Muggles forced into
subservience. We wizards triumphant. Grindelwald
and I, the glorious young leaders of the revolution.
“Oh, I had a few scruples. I assuaged my conscience
with empty words. It would all be for the greater good,
and any harm done would be repaid a hundredfold in
benefits for wizards. Did I know, in my heart of
hearts, what Gellert Grindelwald was? I think I did,
but I closed my eyes. If the plans we were making
came to fruition, all my dreams would come true.
“And at the heart of our schemes, the Deathly
Hallows! How they fascinated him, how they
fascinated both of us! The unbeatable wand, the
weapon that would lead us to power! The
Resurrection Stone — to him, though I pretended not
to know it, it meant an army of Inferi! To me, I
confess, it meant the return of my parents, and the
lifting of all responsibility from my shoulders.
“And the Cloak ... somehow, we never discussed the
Cloak much, Harry. Both of us could conceal
ourselves well enough without the Cloak, the true
magic of which, of course, is that it can be used to
protect and shield others as well as its owner. I
thought that, if we ever found it, it might be useful in
hiding Ariana, but our interest in the Cloak was
mainly that it completed the trio, for the legend said
that the man who united all three objects would then
be truly master of death, which we took to mean
‘invincible.’
 
“Invincible masters of death, Grindelwald and
Dumbledore! Two months of insanity, of cruel
dreams, and neglect of the only two members of my
family left to me.
“And then ... you know what happened. Reality
returned in the form of my rough, unlettered, and
infinitely more admirable brother. I did not want to
hear the truths he shouted at me. I did not want to
hear that I could not set forth to seek Hallows with a
fragile and unstable sister in tow.
“The argument became a fight. Grindelwald lost
control. That which I had always sensed in him,
though I pretended not to, now sprang into terrible
being. And Ariana . . . after all my mother’s care and
caution ... lay dead upon the floor.”
Dumbledore gave a little gasp and began to cry in
earnest. Harry reached out and was glad to find that
he could touch him: He gripped his arm tightly and
Dumbledore gradually regained control.
“Well, Grindelwald fled, as anyone but I could have
predicted. He vanished, with his plans for seizing
power, and his schemes for Muggle torture, and his
dreams of the Deathly Hallows, dreams in which I
had encouraged him and helped him. He ran, while I
was left to bury my sister, and learn to live with my
guilt and my terrible grief, the price of my shame.
“Years passed. There were rumors about him. They
said he had procured a wand of immense power. I,
meanwhile, was offered the post of Minister of Magic,
not once, but several times. Naturally, I refused. I had
learned that I was not to be trusted with power.”
“But you’d have been better, much better, than Fudge
or Scrimgeour!” burst out Harry.
 
“Would I?” asked Dumbledore heavily. “I am not so
sure. I had proven, as a very young man, that power
was my weakness and my temptation. It is a curious
thing, Harry, but perhaps those who are best suited
to power are those who have never sought it. Those
who, like you, have leadership thrust upon them, and
take up the mantle because they must, and find to
their own surprise that they wear it well.
“I was safer at Hogwarts. I think I was a good teacher
“You were the best — ”
“ — you are very kind, Harry. But while I busied
myself with the training of young wizards,
Grindelwald was raising an army. They say he feared
me, and perhaps he did, but less, I think, than I
feared him.
“Oh, not death,” said Dumbledore, in answer to
Harry’s questioning look. “Not what he could do to me
magically. I knew that we were evenly matched,
perhaps that I was a shade more skillful. It was the
truth I feared. You see, I never knew which of us, in
that last, horrific fight, had actually cast the curse
that killed my sister. You may call me cowardly: You
would be right. Harry, I dreaded beyond all things the
knowledge that it had been I who brought about her
death, not merely through my arrogance and
stupidity, but that I actually struck the blow that
snuffed out her life.
“I think he knew it, I think he knew what frightened
me. I delayed meeting him until finally, it would have
been too shameful to resist any longer. People were
dying and he seemed unstoppable, and I had to do
what I could.
 
“Well, you know what happened next. I won the duel.
I won the wand.”
Another silence. Harry did not ask whether
Dumbledore had ever found out who struck Ariana
dead. He did not want to know, and even less did he
want Dumbledore to have to tell him. At last he knew
what Dumbledore would have seen when he looked in
the Mirror of Erised, and why Dumbledore had been
so understanding of the fascination it had exercised
over Harry.
They sat in silence for a long time, and the
whimperings of the creature behind them barely
disturbed Harry anymore.
At last he said, “Grindelwald tried to stop Voldemort
going after the wand. He lied, you know, pretended he
had never had it.”
Dumbledore nodded, looking down at his lap, tears
still glittering on the crooked nose.
“They say he showed remorse in later years, alone in
his cell at Nurmengard. I hope that it is true. I would
like to think he did feel the horror and shame of what
he had done. Perhaps that lie to Voldemort was his
attempt to make amends ... to prevent Voldemort
from taking the Hallow ...”
"... or maybe from breaking into your tomb?”
suggested Harry, and Dumbledore dabbed his eyes.
After another short pause Harry said, “You tried to
use the Resurrection Stone.”
Dumbledore nodded.
 
“When I discovered it, after all those years, buried in
the abandoned home of the Gaunts — the Hallow I
had craved most of all, though in my youth I had
wanted it for very different reasons — I lost my head,
Harry. I quite forgot that it was now a Horcrux, that
the ring was sure to carry a curse. I picked it up, and
I put it on, and for a second I imagined that I was
about to see Ariana, and my mother, and my father,
and to tell them how very, very sorry I was. ...
“I was such a fool, Harry. After all those years I had
learned nothing. I was unworthy to unite the Deathly
Hallows, I had proved it time and again, and here was
final proof.”
“Why?” said Harry. “It was natural! You wanted to see
them again. What’s wrong with that?”
“Maybe a man in a million could unite the Hallows,
Harry. I was fit only to possess the meanest of them,
the least extraordinary. I was fit to own the Elder
Wand, and not to boast of it, and not to kill with it. I
was permitted to tame and to use it, because I took it,
not for gain, but to save others from it.
“But the Cloak, I took out of vain curiosity, and so it
could never have worked for me as it works for you,
its true owner. The stone I would have used in an
attempt to drag back those who are at peace, rather
than to enable my self-sacrifice, as you did. You are
the worthy possessor of the Hallows.”
Dumbledore patted Harry’s hand, and Harry looked
up at the old man and smiled; he could not help
himself. How could he remain angry with Dumbledore
now?
“Why did you have to make it so difficult?”
 
Dumbledore’s smile was tremulous.
“I am afraid I counted on Miss Granger to slow you
up, Harry. I was afraid that your hot head might
dominate your good heart. I was scared that, if
presented outright with the facts about those
tempting objects, you might seize the Hallows as I
did, at the wrong time, for the wrong reasons. If you
laid hands on them, I wanted you to possess them
safely. You are the true master of death, because the
true master does not seek to run away from Death.
He accepts that he must die, and understands that
there are far, far worse things in the living world than
dying.”
“And Voldemort never knew about the Hallows?”
“I do not think so, because he did not recognize the
Resurrection Stone he turned into a Horcrux. But
even if he had known about them, Harry, I doubt that
he would have been interested in any except the first.
He would not think that he needed the Cloak, and as
for the stone, whom would he want to bring back
from the dead? He fears the dead. He does not love.”
“But you expected him to go after the wand?”
“I have been sure that he would try, ever since your
wand beat Voldemort’s in the graveyard of Little
Hangleton. At first, he was afraid that you had
conquered him by superior skill. Once he had
kidnapped Ollivander, however, he discovered the
existence of the twin cores. He thought that explained
everything. Yet the borrowed wand did no better
against yours! So Voldemort, instead of asking
himself what quality it was in you that had made your
wand so strong, what gift you possessed that he did
not, naturally set out to find the one wand that, they
said, would beat any other. For him, the Elder Wand
 
has become an obsession to rival his obsession with
you. He believes that the Elder Wand removes his last
weakness and makes him truly invincible. Poor
Severus ...”
“If you planned your death with Snape, you meant
him to end up with the Elder Wand, didn’t you?”
“I admit that was my intention,” said Dumbledore,
“but it did not work as I intended, did it?”
“No,” said Harry. “That bit didn’t work out.”
The creature behind them jerked and moaned, and
Harry and Dumbledore sat without talking for the
longest time yet. The realization of what would
happen next settled gradually over Harry in the long
minutes, like softly falling snow.
“I’ve got to go back, haven’t I?”
“That is up to you.”
“I’ve got a choice?”
“Oh yes.” Dumbledore smiled at him. “We are in
King’s Cross, you say? I think that if you decided not
to go back, you would be able to ... let’s say ... board
a train.”
“And where would it take me?”
“On,” said Dumbledore simply.
Silence again.
“Voldemort’s got the Elder Wand.”
“True. Voldemort has the Elder Wand.”
 
“But you want me to go back?”
“I think,” said Dumbledore, “that if you choose to
return, there is a chance that he may be finished for
good. I cannot promise it. But I know this, Harry, that
you have less to fear from returning here than he
does.”
Harry glanced again at the raw-looking thing that
trembled and choked in the shadow beneath the
distant chair.
“Do not pity the dead, Harry. Pity the living, and,
above all, those who live without love. By returning,
you may ensure that fewer souls are maimed, fewer
families are torn apart. If that seems to you a worthy
goal, then we say good-bye for the present.”
Harry nodded and sighed. Leaving this place would
not be nearly as hard as walking into the forest had
been, but it was warm and light and peaceful here,
and he knew that he was heading back to pain and
the fear of more loss. He stood up, and Dumbledore
did the same, and they looked for a long moment into
each other’s faces.
“Tell me one last thing,” said Harry. “Is this real? Or
has this been happening inside my head?”
Dumbledore beamed at him, and his voice sounded
loud and strong in Harry’s ears even though the
bright mist was descending again, obscuring his
figure.
“Of course it is happening inside your head, Harry,
but why on earth should that mean that it is not
real?” *
 
THE FLAW IN THE PLAN
He was lying facedown on the ground again. The
smell of the forest filled his nostrils. He could feel the
cold hard ground beneath his cheek, and the hinge of
his glasses, which had been knocked sideways by the
fall, cutting into his temple. Every inch of him ached,
and the place where the Killing Curse had hit him felt
like the bruise of an iron-clad punch. He did not stir,
but remained exactly where he had fallen, with his
left arm bent out at an awkward angle and his mouth
gaping.
He had expected to hear cheers of triumph and
jubilation at his death, but instead hurried footsteps,
whispers, and solicitous murmurs filled the air.
“My Lord ...my Lord ...”
It was Bellatrix’s voice, and she spoke as if to a lover.
Harry did not dare open his eyes, but allowed his
other senses to explore his predicament. He knew
that his wand was still stowed beneath his robes
because he could feel it pressed between his chest
 
and the ground. A slight cushioning effect in the area
of his stomach told him that the Invisibility Cloak was
also there, stuffed out of sight.
“My Lord ...”
“That will do,” said Voldemort’s voice.
More footsteps: Several people were backing away
from the same spot. Desperate to see what was
happening and why, Harry opened his eyes by a
millimeter.
Voldemort seemed to be getting to his feet. Various
Death Eaters were hurrying away from him, returning
to the crowd lining the clearing. Bellatrix alone
remained behind, kneeling beside Voldemort.
Harry closed his eyes again and considered what he
had seen. The Death Eaters had been huddled
around Voldemort, who seemed to have fallen to the
ground. Something had happened when he had hit
Harry with the Killing Curse. Had Voldemort too
collapsed? It seemed like it. And both of them had
fallen briefly unconscious and both of them had now
returned. ...
“My Lord, let me — ”
“I do not require assistance,” said Voldemort coldly,
and though he could not see it, Harry pictured
Bellatrix withdrawing a helpful hand. “The boy ... Is
he dead?”
There was complete silence in the clearing. Nobody
approached Harry, but he felt their concentrated gaze;
it seemed to press him harder into the ground, and he
was terrified a finger or an eyelid might twitch.
 
“You,” said Voldemort, and there was a bang and a
small shriek of pain. “Examine him. Tell me whether
he is dead.”
Harry did not know who had been sent to verify. He
could only lie there, with his heart thumping
traitorously, and wait to be examined, but at the
same time noting, small comfort though it was, that
Voldemort was wary of approaching him, that
Voldemort suspected that all had not gone to plan. ...
Hands, softer than he had been expecting, touched
Harry’s face, pulled back an eyelid, crept beneath his
shirt, down to his chest, and felt his heart. He could
hear the woman’s fast breathing, her long hair tickled
his face. He knew that she could feel the steady
pounding of life against his ribs.
“Is Draco alive? Is he in the castle?”
The whisper was barely audible; her lips were an inch
from his ear, her head bent so low that her long hair
shielded his face from the onlookers.
“Yes,” he breathed back.
He felt the hand on his chest contract; her nails
pierced him. Then it was withdrawn. She had sat up.
“He is dead!” Narcissa Malfoy called to the watchers.
And now they shouted, now they yelled in triumph
and stamped their feet, and through his eyelids,
Harry saw bursts of red and silver light shoot into the
air in celebration.
Still feigning death on the ground, he understood.
Narcissa knew that the only way she would be
permitted to enter Hogwarts, and find her son, was as
 
part of the conquering army. She no longer cared
whether Voldemort won.
“You see?” screeched Voldemort over the tumult.
“Harry Potter is dead by my hand, and no man alive
can threaten me now! Watch! CrucioV’
Harry had been expecting it, knew his body would not
be allowed to remain unsullied upon the forest floor;
it must be subjected to humiliation to prove
Voldemort’s victory. He was lifted into the air, and it
took all his determination to remain limp, yet the pain
he expected did not come. He was thrown once, twice,
three times into the air: His glasses flew off and he
felt his wand slide a little beneath his robes, but he
kept himself floppy and lifeless, and when he fell to
the ground for the last time, the clearing echoed with
jeers and shrieks of laughter.
“Now,” said Voldemort, “we go to the castle, and show
them what has become of their hero. Who shall drag
the body? No — Wait — ”
There was a fresh outbreak of laughter, and after a
few moments Harry felt the ground trembling beneath
him.
“You carry him,” Voldemort said. “He will be nice and
visible in your arms, will he not? Pick up your little
friend, Hagrid. And the glasses — put on the glasses
— he must be recognizable — ”
Someone slammed Harry’s glasses back onto his face
with deliberate force, but the enormous hands that
lifted him into the air were exceedingly gentle. Harry
could feel Hagrid ’s arms trembling with the force of
his heaving sobs; great tears splashed down upon
him as Hagrid cradled Harry in his arms, and Harry
 
did not dare, by movement or word, to intimate to
Hagrid that all was not, yet, lost.
“Move,” said Voldemort, and Hagrid stumbled
forward, forcing his way through the close-growing
trees, back through the forest. Branches caught at
Harry’s hair and robes, but he lay quiescent, his
mouth lolling open, his eyes shut, and in the
darkness, while the Death Eaters crowed all around
them, and while Hagrid sobbed blindly, nobody
looked to see whether a pulse beat in the exposed
neck of Harry Potter. . . .
The two giants crashed along behind the Death
Eaters; Harry could hear trees creaking and falling as
they passed; they made so much din that birds rose
shrieking into the sky, and even the jeers of the Death
Eaters were drowned. The victorious procession
marched on toward the open ground, and after a
while Harry could tell, by the lightening of the
darkness through his closed eyelids, that the trees
were beginning to thin.
“BANE!”
Hagrid’s unexpected bellow nearly forced Harry’s eyes
open. “Happy now, are yeh, that yeh didn’ fight, yeh
cowardly bunch o’ nags? Are yeh happy Harry Potter’s
— d-dead...?”
Hagrid could not continue, but broke down in fresh
tears. Harry wondered how many centaurs were
watching their procession pass; he dared not open his
eyes to look. Some of the Death Eaters called insults
at the centaurs as they left them behind. A little later,
Harry sensed, by a freshening of the air, that they
had reached the edge of the forest.
“Stop.”
 
Harry thought that Hagrid must have been forced to
obey Voldemort’s command, because he lurched a
little. And now a chill settled over them where they
stood, and Harry heard the rasping breath of the
dementors that patrolled the outer trees. They would
not affect him now. The fact of his own survival
burned inside him, a talisman against them, as
though his father’s stag kept guardian in his heart.
Someone passed close by Harry, and he knew that it
was Voldemort himself because he spoke a moment
later, his voice magically magnified so that it swelled
through the grounds, crashing upon Harry’s
eardrums.
“Harry Potter is dead. He was killed as he ran away,
trying to save himself while you lay down your lives
for him. We bring you his body as proof that your
hero is gone.
“The battle is won. You have lost half of your fighters.
My Death Eaters outnumber you, and the Boy Who
Lived is finished. There must be no more war. Anyone
who continues to resist, man, woman, or child, will be
slaughtered, as will every member of their family.
Come out of the castle now, kneel before me, and you
shall be spared. Your parents and children, your
brothers and sisters will live and be forgiven, and you
will join me in the new world we shall build together.”
There was silence in the grounds and from the castle.
Voldemort was so close to him that Harry did not dare
open his eyes again.
“Come,” said Voldemort, and Harry heard him move
ahead, and Hagrid was forced to follow. Now Harry
opened his eyes a fraction, and saw Voldemort
striding in front of them, wearing the great snake
Nagini around his shoulders, now free of her
 
enchanted cage. But Harry had no possibility of
extracting the wand concealed under his robes
without being noticed by the Death Eaters, who
marched on either side of them through the slowly
lightening darkness. ...
“Harry,” sobbed Hagrid. “Oh, Harry ... Harry ...”
Harry shut his eyes tight again. He knew that they
were approaching the castle and strained his ears to
distinguish, above the gleeful voices of the Death
Eaters and their tramping footsteps, signs of life from
those within.
“Stop.”
The Death Eaters came to a halt: Harry heard them
spreading out in a line facing the open front doors of
the school. He could see, even through his closed lids,
the reddish glow that meant light streamed upon him
from the entrance hall. He waited. Any moment, the
people for whom he had tried to die would see him,
lying apparently dead, in Hagrid ’s arms.
“NO!”
The scream was the more terrible because he had
never expected or dreamed that Professor McGonagall
could make such a sound. He heard another woman
laughing nearby, and knew that Bellatrix gloried in
McGonagall’s despair. He squinted again for a single
second and saw the open doorway filling with people,
as the survivors of the battle came out onto the front
steps to face their vanquishers and see the truth of
Harry’s death for themselves. He saw Voldemort
standing a little in front of him, stroking Nagini’s
head with a single white finger. He closed his eyes
again.
 
“No!”
“iVo!”
“Harry! HARRY!”
Ron’s, Hermione’s, and Ginny’s voices were worse
than McGonagall’s; Harry wanted nothing more than
to call back, yet he made himself lie silent, and their
cries acted like a trigger; the crowd of survivors took
up the cause, screaming and yelling abuse at the
Death Eaters, until —
“SILENCE!” cried Voldemort, and there was a bang
and a flash of bright light, and silence was forced
upon them all. “It is over! Set him down, Hagrid, at
my feet, where he belongs!”
Harry felt himself lowered onto the grass.
“You see?” said Voldemort, and Harry felt him striding
backward and forward right beside the place where he
lay. “Harry Potter is dead! Do you understand now,
deluded ones? He was nothing, ever, but a boy who
relied on others to sacrifice themselves for him!”
“He beat you!” yelled Ron, and the charm broke, and
the defenders of Hogwarts were shouting and
screaming again until a second, more powerful bang
extinguished their voices once more.
“He was killed while trying to sneak out of the castle
grounds,” said Voldemort, and there was relish in his
voice for the lie, “killed while trying to save himself — ”
But Voldemort broke off: Harry heard a scuffle and a
shout, then another bang, a flash of light, and a grunt
of pain; he opened his eyes an infinitesimal amount.
Someone had broken free of the crowd and charged at
 
Voldemort: Harry saw the figure hit the ground,
Disarmed, Voldemort throwing the challenger’s wand
aside and laughing.
“And who is this?” he said in his soft snake’s hiss.
“Who has volunteered to demonstrate what happens
to those who continue to fight when the battle is
lost?”
Bellatrix gave a delighted laugh.
“It is Neville Longbottom, my Lord! The boy who has
been giving the Carrows so much trouble! The son of
the Aurors, remember?”
“Ah, yes, I remember,” said Voldemort, looking down
at Neville, who was struggling back to his feet,
unarmed and unprotected, standing in the no-man ’s-
land between the survivors and the Death Eaters.
“But you are a pureblood, aren’t you, my brave boy?”
Voldemort asked Neville, who stood facing him, his
empty hands curled in fists.
“So what if I am?” said Neville loudly.
“You show spirit and bravery, and you come of noble
stock. You will make a very valuable Death Eater. We
need your kind, Neville Longbottom.”
“I’ll join you when hell freezes over,” said Neville.
“Dumbledore’s Army!” he shouted, and there was an
answering cheer from the crowd, whom Voldemort’s
Silencing Charms seemed unable to hold.
“Very well,” said Voldemort, and Harry heard more
danger in the silkiness of his voice than in the most
powerful curse. “If that is your choice, Longbottom,
we revert to the original plan. On your head,” he said
quietly, “be it.”
 
Still watching through his lashes, Harry saw
Voldemort wave his wand. Seconds later, out of one of
the castle’s shattered windows, something that looked
like a misshapen bird flew through the half light and
landed in Voldemort’s hand. He shook the mildewed
object by its pointed end and it dangled, empty and
ragged: the Sorting Hat.
“There will be no more Sorting at Hogwarts School,”
said Voldemort. “There will be no more Houses. The
emblem, shield, and colors of my noble ancestor,
Salazar Slytherin, will suffice for everyone. Won’t
they, Neville Longbottom?”
He pointed his wand at Neville, who grew rigid and
still, then forced the hat onto Neville’s head, so that it
slipped down below his eyes. There were movements
from the watching crowd in front of the castle, and as
one, the Death Eaters raised their wands, holding the
fighters of Hogwarts at bay.
“Neville here is now going to demonstrate what
happens to anyone foolish enough to continue to
oppose me,” said Voldemort, and with a flick of his
wand, he caused the Sorting Hat to burst into flames.
Screams split the dawn, and Neville was aflame,
rooted to the spot, unable to move, and Harry could
not bear it: He must act —
And then many things happened at the same
moment.
They heard uproar from the distant boundary of the
school as what sounded like hundreds of people came
swarming over the out-of-sight walls and pelted
toward the castle, uttering loud war cries. At the
same time, Grawp came lumbering around the side of
the castle and yelled, “HAGGER!” His cry was
 
answered by roars from Voldemort’s giants: They ran
at Grawp like bull elephants, making the earth quake.
Then came hooves and the twangs of bows, and
arrows were suddenly falling amongst the Death
Eaters, who broke ranks, shouting their surprise.
Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak from inside his
robes, swung it over himself, and sprang to his feet,
as Neville moved too.
In one swift, fluid motion, Neville broke free of the
Body-Bind Curse upon him; the flaming hat fell off
him and he drew from its depths something silver,
with a glittering, rubied handle —
The slash of the silver blade could not be heard over
the roar of the oncoming crowd or the sounds of the
clashing giants or of the stampeding centaurs, and
yet it seemed to draw every eye. With a single stroke
Neville sliced off the great snake’s head, which spun
high into the air, gleaming in the light flooding from
the entrance hall, and Voldemort’s mouth was open
in a scream of fury that nobody could hear, and the
snake’s body thudded to the ground at his feet —
Hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak, Harry cast a
Shield Charm between Neville and Voldemort before
the latter could raise his wand. Then, over the
screams and the roars and the thunderous stamps of
the battling giants, Hagrid’s yell came loudest of all.
“HARRY!” Hagrid shouted. “HARRY — WHERE’S
HARRY?”
Chaos reigned. The charging centaurs were scattering
the Death Eaters, everyone was fleeing the giants’
stamping feet, and nearer and nearer thundered the
reinforcements that had come from who knew where;
Harry saw great winged creatures soaring around the
heads of Voldemort’s giants, thestrals and Buckbeak
 
the hippogriff scratching at their eyes while Grawp
punched and pummeled them; and now the wizards,
defenders of Hogwarts and Death Eaters alike, were
being forced back into the castle. Harry was shooting
jinxes and curses at any Death Eater he could see,
and they crumpled, not knowing what or who had hit
them, and their bodies were trampled by the
retreating crowd.
Still hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak, Harry was
buffeted into the entrance hall: He was searching for
Voldemort and saw him across the room, firing spells
from his wand as he backed into the Great Hall, still
screaming instructions to his followers as he sent
curses flying left and right; Harry cast more Shield
Charms, and Voldemort’s would-be victims, Seamus
Finnigan and Hannah Abbott, darted past him into
the Great Hall, where they joined the fight already
flourishing inside it.
And now there were more, even more people storming
up the front steps, and Harry saw Charlie Weasley
overtaking Horace Slughorn, who was still wearing
his emerald pajamas. They seemed to have returned
at the head of what looked like the families and
friends of every Hogwarts student who had remained
to fight, along with the shopkeepers and homeowners
of Hogsmeade. The centaurs Bane, Ronan, and
Magorian burst into the hall with a great clatter of
hooves, as behind Harry the door that led to the
kitchens was blasted off its hinges.
The house-elves of Hogwarts swarmed into the
entrance hall, screaming and waving carving knives
and cleavers, and at their head, the locket of Regulus
Black bouncing on his chest, was Kreacher, his
bullfrog’s voice audible even above this din: “Fight!
Fight! Fight for my Master, defender of house-elves!
 
Fight the Dark Lord, in the name of brave Regulus!
Fight!”
They were hacking and stabbing at the ankles and
shins of Death Eaters, their tiny faces alive with
malice, and everywhere Harry looked Death Eaters
were folding under sheer weight of numbers,
overcome by spells, dragging arrows from wounds,
stabbed in the leg by elves, or else simply attempting
to escape, but swallowed by the oncoming horde.
But it was not over yet: Harry sped between duelers,
past struggling prisoners, and into the Great Hall.
Voldemort was in the center of the battle, and he was
striking and smiting all within reach. Harry could not
get a clear shot, but fought his way nearer, still
invisible, and the Great Hall became more and more
crowded as everyone who could walk forced their way
inside.
Harry saw Yaxley slammed to the floor by George and
Lee Jordan, saw Dolohov fall with a scream at
Flitwick’s hands, saw Walden Macnair thrown across
the room by Hagrid, hit the stone wall opposite, and
slide unconscious to the ground. He saw Ron and
Neville bringing down Fenrir Greyback, Aberforth
Stunning Rookwood, Arthur and Percy flooring
Thicknesse, and Lucius and Narcissa Malfoy running
through the crowd, not even attempting to fight,
screaming for their son.
Voldemort was now dueling McGonagall, Slughorn,
and Kingsley all at once, and there was cold hatred in
his face as they wove and ducked around him, unable
to finish him —
Bellatrix was still fighting too, fifty yards away from
Voldemort, and like her master she dueled three at
 
once: Hermione, Ginny, and Luna, all battling their
hardest, but Bellatrix was equal to them, and Harry’s
attention was diverted as a Killing Curse shot so close
to Ginny that she missed death by an inch —
He changed course, running at Bellatrix rather than
Voldemort, but before he had gone a few steps he was
knocked sideways.
“NOT MY DAUGHTER, YOU BITCH!”
Mrs. Weasley threw off her cloak as she ran, freeing
her arms. Bellatrix spun on the spot, roaring with
laughter at the sight of her new challenger.
“OUT OF MY WAY!” shouted Mrs. Weasley to the three
girls, and with a swipe of her wand she began to duel.
Harry watched with terror and elation as Molly
Weasley’s wand slashed and twirled, and Bellatrix
Lestrange’s smile faltered and became a snarl. Jets of
light flew from both wands, the floor around the
witches’ feet became hot and cracked; both women
were fighting to kill.
“No!” Mrs. Weasley cried as a few students ran
forward, trying to come to her aid. “Get back! Get
back ! She is mine!”
Hundreds of people now lined the walls, watching the
two fights, Voldemort and his three opponents,
Bellatrix and Molly, and Harry stood, invisible, torn
between both, wanting to attack and yet to protect,
unable to be sure that he would not hit the innocent.
“What will happen to your children when I’ve killed
you?” taunted Bellatrix, as mad as her master,
capering as Molly’s curses danced around her. “When
Mummy’s gone the same way as Freddie?”
 
“You — will — never — touch — our — children —
again!” screamed Mrs. Weasley.
Bellatrix laughed, the same exhilarated laugh her
cousin Sirius had given as he toppled backward
through the veil, and suddenly Harry knew what was
going to happen before it did.
Molly’s curse soared beneath Bellatrix’s outstretched
arm and hit her squarely in the chest, directly over
her heart.
Bellatrix’s gloating smile froze, her eyes seemed to
bulge: For the tiniest space of time she knew what
had happened, and then she toppled, and the
watching crowd roared, and Voldemort screamed.
Harry felt as though he turned in slow motion; he saw
McGonagall, Kingsley, and Slughorn blasted
backward, flailing and writhing through the air, as
Voldemort ’s fury at the fall of his last, best lieutenant
exploded with the force of a bomb. Voldemort raised
his wand and directed it at Molly Weasley.
“Protego\” roared Harry, and the Shield Charm
expanded in the middle of the Hall, and Voldemort
stared around for the source as Harry pulled off the
Invisibility Cloak at last.
The yell of shock, the cheers, the screams on every
side of “Harry!” “HE’S ALIVE!” were stifled at once.
The crowd was afraid, and silence fell abruptly and
completely as Voldemort and Harry looked at each
other, and began, at the same moment, to circle each
other.
“I don’t want anyone else to try to help,” Harry said
loudly, and in the total silence his voice carried like a
trumpet call. “It’s got to be like this. It’s got to be me.”
 
Voldemort hissed.
“Potter doesn’t mean that,” he said, his red eyes wide.
“That isn’t how he works, is it? Who are you going to
use as a shield today, Potter?”
“Nobody,” said Harry simply. “There are no more
Horcruxes. It’s just you and me. Neither can live while
the other survives, and one of us is about to leave for
good. ...”
“One of us?” jeered Voldemort, and his whole body
was taut and his red eyes stared, a snake that was
about to strike. “You think it will be you, do you, the
boy who has survived by accident, and because
Dumbledore was pulling the strings?”
“Accident, was it, when my mother died to save me?”
asked Harry. They were still moving sideways, both of
them, in that perfect circle, maintaining the same
distance from each other, and for Harry no face
existed but Voldemort’s. “Accident, when I decided to
fight in that graveyard? Accident, that I didn’t defend
myself tonight, and still survived, and returned to
fight again?”
“Accidents'.” screamed Voldemort, but still he did not
strike, and the watching crowd was frozen as if
Petrified, and of the hundreds in the Hall, nobody
seemed to breathe but they two. “Accident and
chance and the fact that you crouched and sniveled
behind the skirts of greater men and women, and
permitted me to kill them for you!”
“You won’t be killing anyone else tonight,” said Harry
as they circled, and stared into each other’s eyes,
green into red. “You won’t be able to kill any of them
ever again. Don’t you get it? I was ready to die to stop
you from hurting these people — ”
 
“But you did not!”
“ — I meant to, and that’s what did it. I’ve done what
my mother did. They’re protected from you. Haven’t
you noticed how none of the spells you put on them
are binding? You can’t torture them. You can’t touch
them. You don’t learn from your mistakes, Riddle, do
you?”
“ You dare — ”
“Yes, I dare,” said Harry. “I know things you don’t
know, Tom Riddle. I know lots of important things
that you don’t. Want to hear some, before you make
another big mistake?”
Voldemort did not speak, but prowled in a circle, and
Harry knew that he kept him temporarily mesmerized
and at bay, held back by the faintest possibility that
Harry might indeed know a final secret. ...
“Is it love again?” said Voldemort, his snake’s face
jeering. “Dumbledore’s favorite solution, love, which
he claimed conquered death, though love did not stop
him falling from the tower and breaking like an old
waxwork? Love, which did not prevent me stamping
out your Mudblood mother like a cockroach, Potter —
and nobody seems to love you enough to run forward
this time and take my curse. So what will stop you
dying now when I strike?”
“Just one thing,” said Harry, and still they circled
each other, wrapped in each other, held apart by
nothing but the last secret.
“If it is not love that will save you this time,” said
Voldemort, “you must believe that you have magic
that I do not, or else a weapon more powerful than
mine?”
 
“I believe both,” said Harry, and he saw shock flit
across the snakelike face, though it was instantly
dispelled; Voldemort began to laugh, and the sound
was more frightening than his screams; humorless
and insane, it echoed around the silent Hall.
“You think you know more magic than I do?” he said.
“Than I, than Lord Voldemort, who has performed
magic that Dumbledore himself never dreamed of?”
“Oh, he dreamed of it,” said Harry, “but he knew more
than you, knew enough not to do what you’ve done.”
“You mean he was weak!” screamed Voldemort. “Too
weak to dare, too weak to take what might have been
his, what will be mine!”
“No, he was cleverer than you,” said Harry, “a better
wizard, a better man.”
“I brought about the death of Albus Dumbledore!”
“You thought you did,” said Harry, “but you were
wrong.”
For the first time, the watching crowd stirred as the
hundreds of people around the walls drew breath as
one.
“Dumbledore is dead\” Voldemort hurled the words at
Harry as though they would cause him unendurable
pain. “His body decays in the marble tomb in the
grounds of this castle, I have seen it, Potter, and he
will not return!”
“Yes, Dumbledore’s dead,” said Harry calmly, “but
you didn’t have him killed. He chose his own manner
of dying, chose it months before he died, arranged the
 
whole thing with the man you thought was your
servant.”
“What childish dream is this?” said Voldemort, but
still he did not strike, and his red eyes did not waver
from Harry’s.
“Severus Snape wasn’t yours,” said Harry. “Snape
was Dumbledore’s, Dumbledore’s from the moment
you started hunting down my mother. And you never
realized it, because of the thing you can’t understand.
You never saw Snape cast a Patronus, did you,
Riddle?”
Voldemort did not answer. They continued to circle
each other like wolves about to tear each other apart.
“Snape’s Patronus was a doe,” said Harry, “the same
as my mother’s, because he loved her for nearly all of
his life, from the time when they were children. You
should have realized,” he said as he saw Voldemort’s
nostrils flare, “he asked you to spare her life, didn’t
he?”
“He desired her, that was all,” sneered Voldemort,
“but when she had gone, he agreed that there were
other women, and of purer blood, worthier of him — ”
“Of course he told you that,” said Harry, “but he was
Dumbledore’s spy from the moment you threatened
her, and he’s been working against you ever since!
Dumbledore was already dying when Snape finished
him!”
“It matters not!” shrieked Voldemort, who had
followed every word with rapt attention, but now let
out a cackle of mad laughter. “It matters not whether
Snape was mine or Dumbledore’s, or what petty
obstacles they tried to put in my path! I crushed them
 
as I crushed your mother, Snape ’s supposed great
love\ Oh, but it all makes sense, Potter, and in ways
that you do not understand!
“Dumbledore was trying to keep the Elder Wand from
me! He intended that Snape should be the true
master of the wand! But I got there ahead of you, little
boy — I reached the wand before you could get your
hands on it, I understood the truth before you caught
up. I killed Severus Snape three hours ago, and the
Elder Wand, the Deathstick, the Wand of Destiny is
truly mine! Dumbledore ’s last plan went wrong, Harry
Potter!”
“Yeah, it did,” said Harry. “You’re right. But before
you try to kill me, I’d advise you to think about what
you’ve done. ... Think, and try for some remorse,
Riddle. ...”
“What is this?”
Of all the things that Harry had said to him, beyond
any revelation or taunt, nothing had shocked
Voldemort like this. Harry saw his pupils contract to
thin slits, saw the skin around his eyes whiten.
“It’s your one last chance,” said Harry, “it’s all you’ve
got left. ... I’ve seen what you’ll be otherwise. ... Be a
man ... try ... Try for some remorse. ...”
“You dare — ?” said Voldemort again.
“Yes, I dare,” said Harry, “because Dumbledore’s last
plan hasn’t backfired on me at all. It’s backfired on
you, Riddle.”
Voldemort’s hand was trembling on the Elder Wand,
and Harry gripped Draco’s very tightly. The moment,
he knew, was seconds away.
 
“That wand still isn’t working properly for you
because you murdered the wrong person. Severus
Snape was never the true master of the Elder Wand.
He never defeated Dumbledore.”
“He killed — ”
“Aren’t you listening? Snape never beat Dumbledorel
Dumbledore’s death was planned between them!
Dumbledore intended to die undefeated, the wand’s
last true master! If all had gone as planned, the
wand’s power would have died with him, because it
had never been won from him!”
“But then, Potter, Dumbledore as good as gave me the
wand!” Voldemort’s voice shook with malicious
pleasure. “I stole the wand from its last master’s
tomb! I removed it against its last master’s wishes! Its
power is mine!”
“You still don’t get it, Riddle, do you? Possessing the
wand isn’t enough! Holding it, using it, doesn’t make
it really yours. Didn’t you listen to Ollivander? The
wand chooses the wizard. ... The Elder Wand
recognized a new master before Dumbledore died,
someone who never even laid a hand on it. The new
master removed the wand from Dumbledore against
his will, never realizing exactly what he had done, or
that the world’s most dangerous wand had given him
its allegiance. ...”
Voldemort’s chest rose and fell rapidly, and Harry
could feel the curse coming, feel it building inside the
wand pointed at his face.
“The true master of the Elder Wand was Draco
Malfoy.”
 
Blank shock showed in Voldemort’s face for a
moment, but then it was gone.
“But what does it matter?” he said softly. “Even if you
are right, Potter, it makes no difference to you and
me. You no longer have the phoenix wand: We duel
on skill alone ... and after I have killed you, I can
attend to Draco Malfoy. ...”
“But you’re too late,” said Harry. “You’ve missed your
chance. I got there first. I overpowered Draco weeks
ago. I took this wand from him.”
Harry twitched the hawthorn wand, and he felt the
eyes of everyone in the Hall upon it.
“So it all comes down to this, doesn’t it?” whispered
Harry. “Does the wand in your hand know its last
master was Disarmed? Because if it does ... I am the
true master of the Elder Wand.”
A red-gold glow burst suddenly across the enchanted
sky above them as an edge of dazzling sun appeared
over the sill of the nearest window. The light hit both
of their faces at the same time, so that Voldemort’s
was suddenly a flaming blur. Harry heard the high
voice shriek as he too yelled his best hope to the
heavens, pointing Draco’s wand:
“Avada KedavraV’
“ Expelliarmus\ ”
The bang was like a cannon blast, and the golden
flames that erupted between them, at the dead center
of the circle they had been treading, marked the point
where the spells collided. Harry saw Voldemort’s
green jet meet his own spell, saw the Elder Wand fly
high, dark against the sunrise, spinning across the
 
enchanted ceiling like the head of Nagini, spinning
through the air toward the master it would not kill,
who had come to take full possession of it at last. And
Harry, with the unerring skill of the Seeker, caught
the wand in his free hand as Voldemort fell backward,
arms splayed, the slit pupils of the scarlet eyes rolling
upward. Tom Riddle hit the floor with a mundane
finality, his body feeble and shrunken, the white
hands empty, the snakelike face vacant and
unknowing. Voldemort was dead, killed by his own
rebounding curse, and Harry stood with two wands in
his hand, staring down at his enemy’s shell.
One shivering second of silence, the shock of the
moment suspended: and then the tumult broke
around Harry as the screams and the cheers and the
roars of the watchers rent the air. The fierce new sun
dazzled the windows as they thundered toward him,
and the first to reach him were Ron and Hermione,
and it was their arms that were wrapped around him,
their incomprehensible shouts that deafened him.
Then Ginny, Neville, and Luna were there, and then
all the Weasleys and Hagrid, and Kingsley and
McGonagall and Flitwick and Sprout, and Harry could
not hear a word that anyone was shouting, nor tell
whose hands were seizing him, pulling him, trying to
hug some part of him, hundreds of them pressing in,
all of them determined to touch the Boy Who Lived,
the reason it was over at last —
The sun rose steadily over Hogwarts, and the Great
Hall blazed with life and light. Harry was an
indispensable part of the mingled outpourings of
jubilation and mourning, of grief and celebration.
They wanted him there with them, their leader and
symbol, their savior and their guide, and that he had
not slept, that he craved the company of only a few of
them, seemed to occur to no one. He must speak to
the bereaved, clasp their hands, witness their tears,
 
receive their thanks, hear the news now creeping in
from every quarter as the morning drew on; that the
Imperiused up and down the country had come back
to themselves, that Death Eaters were fleeing or else
being captured, that the innocent of Azkaban were
being released at that very moment, and that Kingsley
Shacklebolt had been named temporary Minister of
Magic. ...
They moved Voldemort’s body and laid it in a
chamber off the Hall, away from the bodies of Fred,
Tonks, Lupin, Colin Creevey, and fifty others who had
died fighting him. McGonagall had replaced the
House tables, but nobody was sitting according to
House anymore: All were jumbled together, teachers
and pupils, ghosts and parents, centaurs and house-
elves, and Firenze lay recovering in a corner, and
Grawp peered in through a smashed window, and
people were throwing food into his laughing mouth.
After a while, exhausted and drained, Harry found
himself sitting on a bench beside Luna.
“I’d want some peace and quiet, if it were me,” she
said.
“I’d love some,” he replied.
“I’ll distract them all,” she said. “Use your Cloak.”
And before he could say a word she had cried, “Oooh,
look, a Blibbering Humdinger!” and pointed out of the
window. Everyone who heard looked around, and
Harry slid the Cloak up over himself, and got to his
feet.
Now he could move through the Hall without
interference. He spotted Ginny two tables away; she
was sitting with her head on her mother’s shoulder:
There would be time to talk later, hours and days and
 
maybe years in which to talk. He saw Neville, the
sword of Gryffindor lying beside his plate as he ate,
surrounded by a knot of fervent admirers. Along the
aisle between the tables he walked, and he spotted
the three Malfoys, huddled together as though unsure
whether or not they were supposed to be there, but
nobody was paying them any attention. Everywhere
he looked he saw families reunited, and finally, he
saw the two whose company he craved most.
“It’s me,” he muttered, crouching down between
them. “Will you come with me?”
They stood up at once, and together he, Ron, and
Hermione left the Great Hall. Great chunks were
missing from the marble staircase, part of the
balustrade gone, and rubble and bloodstains
occurred every few steps as they climbed.
Somewhere in the distance they could hear Peeves
zooming through the corridors singing a victory song
of his own composition:
We did it, we bashed them, wee Potter’s the one,
And Voldy’s gone moldy, so now let’s have fun!
“Really gives a feeling for the scope and tragedy of the
thing, doesn’t it?” said Ron, pushing open a door to
let Harry and Hermione through.
Happiness would come, Harry thought, but at the
moment it was muffled by exhaustion, and the pain of
losing Fred and Lupin and Tonks pierced him like a
physical wound every few steps. Most of all he felt the
most stupendous relief, and a longing to sleep. But
first he owed an explanation to Ron and Hermione,
who had stuck with him for so long, and who
deserved the truth. Painstakingly he recounted what
 
he had seen in the Pensieve and what had happened
in the forest, and they had not even begun to express
all their shock and amazement when at last they
arrived at the place to which they had been walking,
though none of them had mentioned their
destination.
Since he had last seen it, the gargoyle guarding the
entrance to the headmaster’s study had been knocked
aside; it stood lopsided, looking a little punch-drunk,
and Harry wondered whether it would be able to
distinguish passwords anymore.
“Can we go up?” he asked the gargoyle.
“Feel free,” groaned the statue.
They clambered over him and onto the spiral stone
staircase that moved slowly upward like an escalator.
Harry pushed open the door at the top.
He had one, brief glimpse of the stone Pensieve on the
desk where he had left it, and then an earsplitting
noise made him cry out, thinking of curses and
returning Death Eaters and the rebirth of Voldemort
But it was applause. All around the walls, the
headmasters and headmistresses of Hogwarts were
giving him a standing ovation; they waved their hats
and in some cases their wigs, they reached through
their frames to grip each other’s hands; they danced
up and down on the chairs in which they had been
painted; Dilys Derwent sobbed unashamedly; Dexter
Fortescue was waving his ear-trumpet; and Phineas
Nigellus called, in his high, reedy voice, “And let it be
noted that Slytherin House played its part! Let our
contribution not be forgotten!”
 
But Harry had eyes only for the man who stood in the
largest portrait directly behind the headmaster’s
chair. Tears were sliding down from behind the half-
moon spectacles into the long silver beard, and the
pride and the gratitude emanating from him filled
Harry with the same balm as phoenix song.
At last, Harry held up his hands, and the portraits fell
respectfully silent, beaming and mopping their eyes
and waiting eagerly for him to speak. He directed his
words at Dumbledore, however, and chose them with
enormous care. Exhausted and bleary-eyed though he
was, he must make one last effort, seeking one last
piece of advice.
“The thing that was hidden in the Snitch,” he began,
“I dropped it in the forest. I don’t know exactly where,
but I’m not going to go looking for it again. Do you
agree?”
“My dear boy, I do,” said Dumbledore, while his fellow
pictures looked confused and curious. “A wise and
courageous decision, but no less than I would have
expected of you. Does anyone else know where it fell?”
“No one,” said Harry, and Dumbledore nodded his
satisfaction.
“I’m going to keep Ignotus’s present, though,” said
Harry, and Dumbledore beamed.
“But of course, Harry, it is yours forever, until you
pass it on!”
“And then there’s this.”
Harry held up the Elder Wand, and Ron and
Hermione looked at it with a reverence that, even in
 
his befuddled and sleep-deprived state, Harry did not
like to see.
“I don’t want it,” said Harry.
“What?” said Ron loudly. “Are you mental?”
“I know it’s powerful,” said Harry wearily. “But I was
happier with mine. So ...”
He rummaged in the pouch hung around his neck,
and pulled out the two halves of holly still just
connected by the finest thread of phoenix feather.
Hermione had said that they could not be repaired,
that the damage was too severe. All he knew was that
if this did not work, nothing would.
He laid the broken wand upon the headmaster’s desk,
touched it with the very tip of the Elder Wand, and
said, “Reparo.”
As his wand resealed, red sparks flew out of its end.
Harry knew that he had succeeded. He picked up the
holly and phoenix wand and felt a sudden warmth in
his fingers, as though wand and hand were rejoicing
at their reunion.
“I’m putting the Elder Wand,” he told Dumbledore,
who was watching him with enormous affection and
admiration, “back where it came from. It can stay
there. If I die a natural death like Ignotus, its power
will be broken, won’t it? The previous master will
never have been defeated. That’ll be the end of it.”
Dumbledore nodded. They smiled at each other.
“Are you sure?” said Ron. There was the faintest trace
of longing in his voice as he looked at the Elder Wand.
 
“I think Harry’s right,” said Hermione quietly.
“That wand’s more trouble than it’s worth,” said
Harry. “And quite honestly,” he turned away from the
painted portraits, thinking now only of the four-poster
bed lying waiting for him in Gryffindor Tower, and
wondering whether Kreacher might bring him a
sandwich there, “I’ve had enough trouble for a
lifetime.”
 
ayue
NINETEEN YEARS LATER
Autumn seemed to arrive suddenly that year. The
morning of the first of September was crisp and
golden as an apple, and as the little family bobbed
across the rumbling road toward the great sooty
station, the fumes of car exhausts and the breath of
pedestrians sparkled like cobwebs in the cold air. Two
large cages rattled on top of the laden trolleys the
parents were pushing; the owls inside them hooted
indignantly, and the redheaded girl trailed tearfully
behind her brothers, clutching her father’s arm.
“It won’t be long, and you’ll be going too,” Harry told
her.
“Two years,” sniffed Lily. “I want to go now\”
The commuters stared curiously at the owls as the
family wove its way toward the barrier between
platforms nine and ten. Albus’s voice drifted back to
Harry over the surrounding clamor; his sons had
resumed the argument they had started in the car.
 
“I won’ti I won’t be in Slytherin!”
“James, give it a rest!” said Ginny.
“I only said he might be,” said James, grinning at his
younger brother. “There’s nothing wrong with that. He
might be in Slyth — ”
But James caught his mother’s eye and fell silent.
The five Potters approached the barrier. With a
slightly cocky look over his shoulder at his younger
brother, James took the trolley from his mother and
broke into a run. A moment later, he had vanished.
“You’ll write to me, won’t you?” Albus asked his
parents immediately, capitalizing on the momentary
absence of his brother.
“Every day, if you want us to,” said Ginny.
“Not every day,” said Albus quickly. “James says most
people only get letters from home about once a
month.”
“We wrote to James three times a week last year,”
said Ginny.
“And you don’t want to believe everything he tells you
about Hogwarts,” Harry put in. “He likes a laugh,
your brother.”
Side by side, they pushed the second trolley forward,
gathering speed. As they reached the barrier, Albus
winced, but no collision came. Instead, the family
emerged onto platform nine and three-quarters,
which was obscured by thick white steam that was
pouring from the scarlet Hogwarts Express. Indistinct
figures were swarming through the mist, into which
James had already disappeared.
 
“Where are they?” asked Albus anxiously, peering at
the hazy forms they passed as they made their way
down the platform.
“Well find them,” said Ginny reassuringly.
But the vapor was dense, and it was difficult to make
out anybody’s faces. Detached from their owners,
voices sounded unnaturally loud. Harry thought he
heard Percy discoursing loudly on broomstick
regulations, and was quite glad of the excuse not to
stop and say hello. ...
“I think that’s them, Al,” said Ginny suddenly.
A group of four people emerged from the mist,
standing alongside the very last carriage. Their faces
only came into focus when Harry, Ginny, Lily, and
Albus had drawn right up to them.
“Hi,” said Albus, sounding immensely relieved.
Rose, who was already wearing her brand-new
Hogwarts robes, beamed at him.
“Parked all right, then?” Ron asked Harry. “I did.
Hermione didn’t believe I could pass a Muggle driving
test, did you? She thought I’d have to Confund the
examiner.”
“No, I didn’t,” said Hermione, “I had complete faith in
you.”
“As a matter of fact, I did Confund him,” Ron
whispered to Harry, as together they lifted Albus ’s
trunk and owl onto the train. “I only forgot to look in
the wing mirror, and let’s face it, I can use a
Supersensory Charm for that.”
 
Back on the platform, they found Lily and Hugo,
Rose’s younger brother, having an animated
discussion about which House they would be sorted
into when they finally went to Hogwarts.
“If you’re not in Gryffindor, we’ll disinherit you,” said
Ron, “but no pressure.”
“Ron\”
Lily and Hugo laughed, but Albus and Rose looked
solemn.
“He doesn’t mean it,” said Hermione and Ginny, but
Ron was no longer paying attention. Catching Harry’s
eye, he nodded covertly to a point some fifty yards
away. The steam had thinned for a moment, and
three people stood in sharp relief against the shifting
mist.
“Look who it is.”
Draco Malfoy was standing there with his wife and
son, a dark coat buttoned up to his throat. His hair
was receding somewhat, which emphasized the
pointed chin. The new boy resembled Draco as much
as Albus resembled Harry. Draco caught sight of
Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny staring at him,
nodded curtly, and turned away again.
“So that’s little Scorpius,” said Ron under his breath.
“Make sure you beat him in every test, Rosie. Thank
God you inherited your mother’s brains.”
“Ron, for heaven’s sake,” said Hermione, half stern,
half amused. “Don’t try to turn them against each
other before they’ve even started school!”
 
“You’re right, sorry,” said Ron, but unable to help
himself, he added, “Don’t get too friendly with him,
though, Rosie. Granddad Weasley would never forgive
you if you married a pureblood.”
“Hey!”
James had reappeared; he had divested himself of his
trunk, owl, and trolley, and was evidently bursting
with news.
“Teddy’s back there,” he said breathlessly, pointing
back over his shoulder into the billowing clouds of
steam. “Just seen him! And guess what he’s doing?
Snogging Victoire\”
He gazed up at the adults, evidently disappointed by
the lack of reaction.
“Our Teddy! Teddy Lupin\ Snogging our Victoire! Our
cousin! And I asked Teddy what he was doing — ”
“You interrupted them?” said Ginny. “You are so like
Ron — ”
“ — and he said he’d come to see her off! And then he
told me to go away. He’s snogging her!” James added
as though worried he had not made himself clear.
“Oh, it would be lovely if they got married!” whispered
Lily ecstatically. “Teddy would really be part of the
family then!”
“He already comes round for dinner about four times
a week,” said Harry. “Why don’t we just invite him to
live with us and have done with it?”
“Yeah!” said James enthusiastically. “I don’t mind
sharing with A1 — Teddy could have my room!”
 
“No,” said Harry firmly, “you and A1 will share a room
only when I want the house demolished.”
He checked the battered old watch that had once
been Fabian Prewett’s.
“It’s nearly eleven, you’d better get on board.”
“Don’t forget to give Neville our love!” Ginny told
James as she hugged him.
“Mum! I can’t give a professor love\”
“But you know Neville — ”
James rolled his eyes.
“Outside, yeah, but at school he’s Professor
Longbottom, isn’t he? I can’t walk into Herbology and
give him love. ...”
Shaking his head at his mother’s foolishness, he
vented his feelings by aiming a kick at Albus.
“See you later, Al. Watch out for the thestrals.”
“I thought they were invisible? You said they were
invisible !”
But James merely laughed, permitted his mother to
kiss him, gave his father a fleeting hug, then leapt
onto the rapidly filling train. They saw him wave, then
sprint away up the corridor to find his friends.
“Thestrals are nothing to worry about,” Harry told
Albus. “They’re gentle things, there’s nothing scary
about them. Anyway, you won’t be going up to school
in the carriages, you’ll be going in the boats.”
 
Ginny kissed Albus good-bye.
“See you at Christmas.”
“Bye, Al,” said Harry as his son hugged him. “Don’t
forget Hagrid’s invited you to tea next Friday. Don’t
mess with Peeves. Don’t duel anyone till you’ve
learned how. And don’t let James wind you up.”
“What if I’m in Slytherin?”
The whisper was for his father alone, and Harry knew
that only the moment of departure could have forced
Albus to reveal how great and sincere that fear was.
Harry crouched down so that Albus ’s face was slightly
above his own. Alone of Harry’s three children, Albus
had inherited Lily’s eyes.
“Albus Severus,” Harry said quietly, so that nobody
but Ginny could hear, and she was tactful enough to
pretend to be waving to Rose, who was now on the
train, “you were named for two headmasters of
Hogwarts. One of them was a Slytherin and he was
probably the bravest man I ever knew.”
“But just say — ”
“ — then Slytherin House will have gained an excellent
student, won’t it? It doesn’t matter to us, Al. But if it
matters to you, you’ll be able to choose Gryffindor
over Slytherin. The Sorting Hat takes your choice into
account.”
“Really?”
“It did for me,” said Harry.
 
He had never told any of his children that before, and
he saw the wonder in Albus’s face when he said it.
But now the doors were slamming all along the
scarlet train, and the blurred outlines of parents were
swarming forward for final kisses, last-minute
reminders. Albus jumped into the carriage and Ginny
closed the door behind him. Students were hanging
from the windows nearest them. A great number of
faces, both on the train and off, seemed to be turned
toward Harry.
“Why are they all staring?” demanded Albus as he
and Rose craned around to look at the other
students.
“Don’t let it worry you,” said Ron. “It’s me. I’m
extremely famous.”
Albus, Rose, Hugo, and Lily laughed. The train began
to move, and Harry walked alongside it, watching his
son’s thin face, already ablaze with excitement. Harry
kept smiling and waving, even though it was like a
little bereavement, watching his son glide away from
him. ...
The last trace of steam evaporated in the autumn air.
The train rounded a corner. Harry’s hand was still
raised in farewell.
“He’ll be all right,” murmured Ginny.
As Harry looked at her, he lowered his hand
absentmindedly and touched the lightning scar on his
forehead.
“I know he will.”
The scar had not pained Harry for nineteen years. All
was well.
 